A HISTORICAL ADVENTURE 

- FOR THE - 

APPLE COMPUTER 




































A Historical Adventure 


for the Apple® Computer 


(Apple II Edition) 


Art Canfil, Karl Albrecht, 
and Jim McClenahan 

Original Artwork 
Chrisann Brennan 



Hayden Book Company 

A DIVISION OF HAYDEN PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC. 
HASBROUCK HEIGHTS, NEW JERSEY 



A BASIC Dedication 


ID Dill WH04 (4) ■> REASONS (4) 

ED PRINT"TO:" 

30 FOR THANKS + 1 TO 4 
4D READ WHOS (THANKS) 

5D READ REASONS (THANKS) 
bO PRINT UHOS (THANKS)-, 

7D PRINT REASONS (THANKS) 

60 NEXT THANKS 
=10 END 

1DD DATA THE DRAGON-. FOR DRAGGING AND DRAGOONING US UNTIL UE 
wrote THIS BOOK-, ELDER BROTHER UU-i as a representative of 
FINANCIAL REALITIES (IF THE DRAGON HELD THE CARROT - lilU HELD 
THE STICK) 

110 DATA BARBARA FINGER FOR EVERYTHING FRON ENCOURAGEMENT 
TO COPYREADING-, OUR FAMILIES-, FOR THEIR PATIENCE AND 
SUPPORT DURING THIS PROJECT 


Acquisitions Editor: Karen Pastuzyn 
Production Editor: Ronnie Groff 
Cover design: Paul Perlow 

Printing and binding: The Maple-Vail Manufacturing Group 

Copyright © 1986 by HAYDEN BOOK COMPANY. All rights reserved. No part of 
this book may be reprinted, or reproduced, or utilized in any form or by any 
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher. 

Printed in the United States of America 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 PRINTING 


86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 YEAR 



Preface — How to Use this Book 


This book is written for anyone with a bit of Applesoft BASIC program¬ 
ming knowledge. It is organized so as to allow program lines to be typed 
into any Apple II computer as you read along. 

To make it easier to understand how Taipan works, the program will be 
shown in a form different from that in which it will actually appear in your 
Apple II. 

Here is an example of a line as it will be presented in this book: 

5fl0 IF X = 1 AND GP C XI) > C THEN VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT "YOU CAN'T AFFORD ANY "G$(XD". "i: 

GOSUB 7b0: 

GOTO E3D 


In the above example, each logical portion of line 280 is placed by itself. 

This is closer to how line 280 will look on your screen after you've typed 
it into your Apple II: 

EflO IF X = 1 AND GP(X1) > C THEN VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT "YOU CAN'T AFFORD ANY "G$(XD 
"• :G0SUB7b0:G0T0S3D 


The Apple II computer formats a screen listing of a BASIC program in its 
own special way. Although you may type in the program as shown above, 
the computer will add spaces and advance to the next screen line accord- 
ing to its built-in way of doing things. Thus the lines will appear different 
if, later, you go back to list them. 

The most important thing to remember is this: we've used separate 
lines to show program logic clearly, but you must ignore those separate 
lines while actually typing this program into your Apple II. 

It is a good idea to regularly save copies of the program to disk, espe¬ 
cially when you intend to quit working on it for awhile. 



Remember that the letter "O" is not the same thing as the numeral "0" 
— they may look much the same, but to your computer, they're entirely 
different. Also, some readers may be accustomed to typewriters which use 
a lowercase letter "1" as a substitute for the numeral "1". Be sure to use the 
proper key, as the computer knows the difference. 

The game Taipan presented in this book is designed to be played on any 
of the "family" of Apple II computers using Applesoft BASIC, and at least 
48K of RAM. 

The section of this book entitled "Sea Action" adds graphics routines to 
make pirate encounters more exciting. 



Introduction 


In recent years there has been a mushrooming growth in the field of 
video games. First came simple games in which little white dots bounced 
back and forth between movable paddles on the screen. Soon these were 
followed by enormously successful games of shoot-'em-up, eat-'em-up 
and blow-'em-up. 

Entire industries were built upon the growing mass appeal of these 
games. Investors and corporate conglomerates have poured in millions to 
keep the video game market constantly expanding. That market has 
grown, and grown, and grown. 

The inevitable has finally happened — people have started to lose 
interest in video games. Increasingly, people are finding that they "burn 
out" on games which they find require more of an ability to "twitch" 
than to think. 

This slackening of interest has shaken stockmarkets, retail outlets, and 
corporate boardrooms. Investors have begun to be cautious about putting 
their money into electronic games. 

But the integrated circuit technology which made video game 
machines possible also has set the stage for inexpensive home com¬ 
puters. Rather than being limited to a finite number of game cartridges, 
home computers allow their users to design, write, and execute their own 
programs, especially in the relatively simple and English-like computer 
language called BASIC, with which the vast majority of these machines 
are equipped. 

Recently, a very important milestone was reached, almost without 
fanfare: more home computers are now being sold than video 
game machines. 

Think about this: home computers make possible a type of electronic 
game which is much less based upon exercising the reflexive speed of a 
person's brain stem than upon exercising the wonderful gray matter with 
which humans think. 

Among the best of such games are those which simulate a complex 
environment, and allow the player to interact in a "lifelike" manner with 
that game environment. 

The Authors call such games "Contextual Computer Games". 



Contextual Computer Games may be a wave of the future in the field 
of entertainment and education. Contextual Computer Games take 
advantage of the computer's speed and power to process information by 
keeping track of all the elements with which the player must interact. 
Thus the complexity of the game can be maintained. 

But "complexity” can be a misleading word, and a negative one at that. 
Because a game is complex in its elements doesn't mean it has to be 
"complex" to play. Baseball is complex in its elements, too. But it doesn't 
take an Einstein to play it — partly because there is a trained Umpire to 
say what is supposed to work, and what isn't. 

Think of the program of a Contextual Computer Game as being, in one 
respect, an Umpire. It tells you when you've scored, and it tells you 
when you're "out". But all you've got to do is play. 

The strength of a Contextual Computer Game lies not only in this 
"automatic Umpire" aspect, but also in its ability to provide unique expe¬ 
riences to even veteran players. A Contextual Computer Game puts 
together a multitude of factors in constantly changing combinations, to 
provide challenges much like "real life". 

Taipan: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer is intended to give 
the Apple II user three things. 

1. An understanding of some fundamental principles of game design 

2. A geographical and historical understanding of a particular game con¬ 
text (in this case, Asia and the turbulent China Trade of the 1800's) 

3. A step-by-step approach to actually writing a game in BASIC using 
points 1 and 2 above, including the actual program lines needed to 
provide a complete Contextual Computer Game 

The Authors hope that this book will provide the reader not only with 
an enjoyable game providing many hours of entertainment, but that the 
reader will become interested in the game's historical background as 
well. Hopefully, the reader will be inspired to design original games 
based upon other historical or fantasy contexts. 

May you live in interesting times . . . 



Contents 


1 Setting the Scene: Hongkong in the Mid-1800's 1 

2 Translating the Context into a Game 5 

3 Initializing Ourselves into the Past 9 

4 Taipan Geography 19 

5 A Space-Time Machine 27 

6 To Market, To Market ... 37 

7 Cash on the Barrelhead 59 

8 Keeping Our Other Options Open 77 

9 Let's All Go Down to the Godown 85 

10 An International Record Collection 95 

11 Brother, Can You Spare a Dime? Ill 

12 A Gold Watch and a Hearty Handshake 123 

13 Anchors Aweigh! 129 

14 Piratical Princess of the Eastern Seas 139 

15 Stand by the Swivel Guns! 147 

16 More Pirates 163 

17 Ships of the China Coast 181 

18 Current Events 187 

19 Action at Sea 199 

APPENDIX A Bibliography 209 

APPENDIX B Playing Taipan 211 

INDEX 213 






T A I P A N 

-i Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Setting the Scene: 
Hongkong in the Mid- 1800 's 

CHAPTER ONE 


Anyone who has read the remarkable novel, Tai-pan, by James Clavell, or 
Dynasty, by Robert S. Elegant, knows something of the exotic and excit¬ 
ing flavor which the words "China Trade" can conjure. 

Consider a time and place where fearless and amoral merchant- 
smugglers of European and American origins struggled and fought, lived 
to the fullest, and died — and made or lost fortunes in trade throughout 
the newly opened markets of East Asia. 

The doors to trade with China and Japan had been blasted down by 
the overwhelming military might of the young nations of Europe and 
America. England, France, Holland, Portugal, and Spain had established 
important colonial footholds providing local bases for their fleets, mis¬ 
sionaries, and merchants. Commodore Perry's intimidating black fleet of 
American ships had forced the Shogun to open Japan to the traders of 
the West. Britain's Opium War had inflicted a humiliating defeat upon 
the Manchu Empire, obliging China to accept trade even in the hated 
addictive opium. Throughout East Asia, in that violent time, there were 
warlords and rebels who would pay huge sums for modern Western 
arms. Europe, in return, hungered for the tea, spices, silks, and gold of 

1 



2 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


the fabled Orient. Immense fortunes could be made by men without 
principles to hinder them, if they were brave enough . . . 

The China Traders were just such men. 

Although the native peoples called them many other, less complimen¬ 
tary names, the Chinese expression taipan (or tai-pan) was the one seized 
upon as a title by these Western traders of the China Seas. Tai m Chinese 
means "great" or "gib" or even "supreme". Pan means "leader or 
"boss" in that language. The China Traders took the name to mean 
"Supreme Leader". This term still is used for the heads of trading firms 
from Hongkong to Singapore. But to the Chinese, anyone not Chinese 
was a barbarian, even if such a person was a "big boss". 

The China Trade followed one of the customary rules of business: the 
greater the potential profit, the greater the risk. But the risks to the tai- 
pans were greater than merely going bankrupt: there was always a 
strong possibility of sudden, and unnatural, death. 

Pirates roamed the seas, some of them operating in vast fleets out of 
ports and coves from Japan to the Malay islands. For the most part, these 
fleets were under strict military organization, and they were manned by 
Japanese, Chinese, Malay and European seamen, mercenary adventurers 
to match the likes of the taipans upon whom they preyed. Often the wis¬ 
est thing a China trader could do was to pay out whatever the pirate 
chieftains demanded in tribute, rather than face the dangers of deadly 
pirate attacks. But even if one pirate organization had been bribed not to 
attack, an independent pirate gang might unpredictably attack. Thus the 
taipans armed their clipper ships, lorchas, and junks heavily. 

Another troublesome factor was the presence of the "triads", the 
underworld secret societies of the Chinese. These triads were to be found 
wherever large numbers of Chinese lived or worked. Originally founded 
as Chinese resistance organizations against the hated Manchu rulers of 
China, the triads had also gradually become organized crime syndicates 
which wielded violence and money as weapons to exert their power and 
influence. While Western bankers were often unwilling to extend credit 
to the taipans, sometimes the triads would — at very steep interest rates. 
Of course, it could be very dangerous not to repay such a loan on time. 


Setting the Scene: Hongkong in the Mid- 1800 's: CHAPTER ONE 3 


This, then, was the world of the China Trade, where incredible risks 
were taken daily by the taipans, and where enormous riches could be 
grabbed by the fearless, the resourceful, and the lucky. This is the context 
around which you are about to build yourself a computer game. 








T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Translating the Context into a Game 

CHAPTER TWO 


No simulation game can take everything in an environment into account. 
Just think of the problems involved in trying to create such a "complete" 
Contextual Computer Game: In the context which we are planning to 
implement, you'd literally have to take into account the personal psy¬ 
chology, habits, and economic position of every person even partly 
involved in the China Trade. Not only that, but you'd have to account for 
the tides and weather conditions in each tiny patch of the China Seas. 
You'd have to know the location of, and the behavior of, all the wharf rats 
in Asia. Then what about fluctuations in the financial markets of Europe, 
the political connivings of the Eunuchs in the Chinese Imperial Court, 
the effect of frost on silkworms? 

These are only a handful of possible items which could be enumer¬ 
ated. Many of these factors may seem unimportant, even irrelevant, at 
first glance. But they all added to the actual environmental context of the 
real taipans. So how are we to take them into account? 

Obviously we can't put all these things into a single game, but we can 
do something which better suits our purposes. We can design a game in 
such a way that, when playing it, we feel as though these kinds of factors 
are part of the program. 


5 



6 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


How? There are two main approaches to this problem: First, we can 
include a number of common events, such as bad weather and pirate 
attacks, as fairly regular situations. Secondly, we can create a number of 
rare events, like random robberies and dramatic rises or falls in prices of 
goods, as representative of the vast number of things which could actually 
happen in the "real world". 

Using the built-in "random number generator" of your Apple II com¬ 
puter we can make some events happen quite regularly, while other situ 
ations may not occur more than once, if at all, during any particular 
game. We can set the probability of any event anywhere within a broad 
spectrum of likelihood. 

Trade-offs 

We also need to make the context of the game interactively "realistic". In 
other words, the player should have a feeling that the "world of the 
game reacts as the real world does. For example, reality constantly 
presents us with "trade-offs" — situations where we have choices 
between two or more alternatives, each of which has advantages and dis¬ 
advantages. 

If we are on foot, and need to cross a road against heavy traffic, we 
might have two choices: One choice might be to jay-walk across the 
road. The other could be to go down two blocks to a pedestrian overpass, 
and cross there. With the first choice, we might cross the road much 
more quickly, thus saving some of our precious time — but we risk not 
only getting a citation from a police officer, but being killed by a careless 
driver. With the second choice, we cross the road legally and safely — but 
we use up more time. 

Now let's add another factor: urgency. Suppose that we've just been 
bitten by a poisonous snake, and the nearest hospital is across the road. 
Should we jay-walk or take the overpass? Or what if we had all the time 
in the world that day. Which route then? 

In a Contextual Computer Game, we can vary this factor of urgency. 
Plus we can vary the danger of the traffic, the pedestrian's ability to 
dodge cars, and even the structural safety of the overpass! Trade-offs. 
They're vital factors in Contextual Computer Games, and we'll use them 
in Taipan. 

Player Motivation 

Motivating the player is the key to any good game. You don't have to pos¬ 
sess a degree in psychology to know some of the things which motivate 



Translating the Context into a Game: CHAPTER TWO 7 


people. The desire for power, a lust for money, the drive to gain social sta¬ 
tus, the pleasure of accomplishing something difficult — all these are 
common motivations. In Taipan, we will attempt to motivate the player 
with a combination of greed and pride. 

Greed is vital, because only with this can the player fit into the role of a 
taipan, the role into which our game will thrust the player. 

You may wonder how real greed could be generated in a mere game — 
after all, there's no real money involved. If you're skeptical about this, 
then try to remember the last time you played Monopoly. After playing 
for a few minutes, didn't you get just a little greedy? If not, you're an 
exceptional person, and you probably didn't have much fun! 

But there's a vital factor here that can't be overlooked by a game 
designer: in a game (and maybe in life?), wealth, power, or any other 
reward, will not taste sweet unless there is a struggle to gain it. What 
would be the purpose of playing Solitaire with all the cards in the deck 
face up? There has to be a conflict, and obstacles to overcome, for any 
reward to feel like a reward. 

So in this game we've got to make the player struggle to satisfy 
greed. That struggle, if successfully carried out, will result in pride of 
accomplishment. 

Difficulty 

The degree of difficulty is perhaps the most troublesome factor of all. A 
game designer has to get it just right. If it's too hard to play, everyone 
hates the game. Too easy, and people despise it for being trivial. Yet 
everyone has different standards! It looks as though any game, at best, 
would appeal only to a certain segment, doesn't it? Not necessarily: by 
using trade-offs properly, a single game can be a sort of "one-size-fits- 
all" proposition. It can challenge the bright and the dull, the veteran and 
the novice player. 

How so? There can be so many trade-offs between risky riches and 
safer plodding, between dangerous shortcuts and secure paths, that 
there is almost literally something for everybody. We are putting together 
a game in which anyone who can read and understand words and num¬ 
bers, and can poke keys on an Apple II computer, has a chance to win — 
a game in which a PhD with degrees in Asian Studies, Computer Sci¬ 
ence, and Accounting might lose. A tall order? Maybe. But let's give it a 
try, together. 






T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Initializing Ourselves into the Past 

CHAPTER THREE 


Get your Apple II computer set up! We're about to start typing in our 
Contextual Computer Game. 

Everything must start somewhere — a computer program begins with 
initialization. Here are the first lines of our Initialization routine: 

5 REM INITIALIZATION (10-SD) 

10 HOME: 

A$=" 

W$="ELDER BROTHER UU": 

LY$="LI YUEN": 

YS$="YAMAT0 & SMYTHE": 

TC$ = "0i S-i T-. A-. P-- OR R" 


11 B$=" 


9 



10 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


[Note that there are 40 spaces within the quotes which define A$ in line 
10, and 39 spaces in quotes of B$, in line 11] 

ED VTAB 4: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

HTAB 13: 

PRINT "T A I P A N:": 

NORMAL: 

HTAB 13: 

PRINT"-" 

[The last "PRINT" statement in line 20 has 17 underline ("_") characters] 

El SPEED = 100: 

VTAB T: 

HTAB 14: 

PRINT "A GAME IN": 

PRINT T AB ( 15)=,"C 0 N T E X T": 

PRINT: 

PRINT TAB( 14)^"HAYDEN BOOK C0-" 

EE SPEED = ESS: 

VTAB IS: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 


What's going on in lines 10 to 22? 

First, we use "HOME" to clear the screen. Next, we create five strings, 
A$, W$, LY$, YS$ and TC$. A$ consists of 40 spaces strung together. 
We've created a "string" variable which can be called up and printed at 
any time: a line of spaces, which we'll use to blot out unwanted stuff 
from the screen. 



Initializing Ourselves into the Past: CHAPTER THREE 11 


is used to hold the name of someone we'll get rather too 
acquainted with in the game, the Triad moneylender. Elder Brother Wu. 
\ player starting the game is immediately in debt to Elder Brother Wu. 
The player is assumed to have fled Britain rather hastily and under some- 
thing of a cloud, perhaps signing up as a crewmember on a ship depart- 
ng Liverpool for the Crown Colony of Hongkong, then jumping ship 
and starting business under an alias. Of course, no bank in its right col- 
ective mind would do business with such obvious riff-raff. So you, as the 
player, had to turn to the "Elder Brother", or chief, of one of the under¬ 
ground Chinese secret societies. Mr. Wu is willing to make you a loan. 
UTiv not? After all, at 100% interest, he can't lose, can he? You've 
checked around enough to know that Elder Brother Wu's rate of interest 
is considered quite reasonable by the Chinese standards of the time. 

"LY$" will be used to hold the name of a "mariner" who can be either 
your friend or your foe, depending upon events and on how you look at 
them. Let's face it, most folks would consider Li Yuen a pirate. But he 
would much rather think of himself as the head of a private maritime pro¬ 
tective agency, employing a few thousand rough and ready fellows of 
many nations, the sort of men who might be on the wrong side of the 
law, were it not for Li. Li has a huge fleet of armed junks and lorchas, and 
he patrols both coastal waters and the high seas in order to protect his 
"clients", namely those who are willing to donate to his favorite charity, 
the building fund of the temple of Tin Hau, a Chinese Sea Goddess. 
(Odd: the temple never seems to be quite completed . . .) 

"YS$" is also used for names we'll get to know later. 

Next, in the interest of saving memory, we set up a string called 
"TC$", which is simply part of a prompt we'll use later in the program, 
whenever the player must choose which item of cargo to deal with. 

In line 11, B$ is set up to be a string of 39 spaces. Like A$, we'll use this 
to "clear away" unwanted messages. 

Lines 20 through 22 give us our title display. 

"VTAB 4" in line 20 tells the computer to position its cursor at V(ertical) 
TAB 4, in other words, at the fourth line on the screen. (Since we haven't 
yet given any "HTAB" — or Horizontal TAB — our Apple II assumes we 
start at HTAB 1, the first column of the line.) The INVERSE statement 
tells the computer that whatever is displayed should be in inverse mode, 
in other words, dark letters on an illuminated background. PRINT A$ 



12 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


gives a line of 40 inverse spaces. This appears as a bar of light across the 
screen on the fourth line. 

Since we've just filled in the entire fourth line of the screen, our Apple 
now assumes that our VTAB is 5. HTAB 13 thus puts the cursor to the 13th 
column of screen line five. Program line 20 next has our Apple display the 
name of the game, TAIPAN, still in inverse lettering, and with inverse 
spaces between the letters. Our Apple II would continue to forever dis¬ 
play words in inverse mode if we let it. We get out of the inverse mode by 

using the NORMAL statement, then we print a line of underline ("_") 

characters. 

Line 21 of the program continues in much the same way to display the 
"title page" of our game. But there are some differences. "SPEED = 100" 
instructs the computer to slow down its rate of display, so that we can 
actually see the letters light up on the screen one by one. (The lower the 
number, the slower the display speed. 255 is normal high speed, and 100 
is much slower.) We also use the TAB statement in line 21. TAB(14), for 
instance, works by putting the next PRINT position at the fourteenth 
column of the screen. 

Now we begin to really initialize the program with the next two lines: 

30 DIM -.£*(5)-.APdiS) 

GG(S)tL(5t5)tGP(5)tV(5): 

FOR I = 0 TO 1: 

READ L$(I): 

NEXT I: 

FOR I = 0 TO 11: 

READ I1$(I) : 

NEXT I: 

FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

READ G$(I): 

NEXT I 

40 FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

FOR J = 0 TO 5: 

READ AP(IiJ): 

AP (I -i J) = AP(I-,J) * b a (S - J): NEXT J I: 

G0SUB ISO 


Initializing Ourselves into the Past: CHAPTER THREE 13 


In these lines we've reserved space for numerical and string variable 
arrays, and read in string and numerical information from DATA lines 
which will follow. 

But what do these variables stand for, and why are we using them? To 
use an old phrase, what do they have to do with the price of tea in China? 

These variables will, in fact, among many other things, be used to keep 
track of the price of tea in China! 

Chinese tea was an item of huge economic importance in Europe, par¬ 
ticularly Britain, in the last two centuries. Having been introduced into 
China from Southeast Asia during the time of the Han Empire (206 BC- 
AD 220), tea was originally considered a medicine, at first being con¬ 
sumed after being boiled with rice, orange peels, milk, or even onions. 
Soon, tea was being planted widely in southern and central China. Later, 
the present method of boiling tea alone in water became the standard 
practice. 

During the 1700's tea became the national beverage of the English. The 
merchants and officials of the Ch'ing dynasty of China, and their coun¬ 
terparts in Britain, reaped huge profits from the booming trade. Within a 
century, the tea trade had grown to three-fifths of China's exports. 

The British effort to monopolize the trade, and exploit its wide popu¬ 
larity, led to the imposition of tea taxes as high as 100 percent or more. 
The Boston Tea Party and the slogan, "Taxation without representation is 
tyranny", resulted. Thus the China tea trade contributed to the causes of 
the American Revolution. 

Line 40 reads in raw values for prices of items of trade, then massages 
them so that opium, for instance, will cost more than rice. 

Another item which we are initializing in line 40 is "arms". As early as 
1629, the Chinese Jesuit, Paul Hsu, helped the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) 
try to hold back the Manchu invaders from the north. To this end, he 
obtained artillery (and the cannoneers to handle them) from the Portu¬ 
guese in Macau. Another Jesuit, Father Adam Schall, set up a foundry for 
the Ming regime in 1636, casting twenty cannon, and naming each after 
an individual saint. From those times onward, Asians have sought West¬ 
ern arms with much interest. 

We're also setting up variables to deal with rice. In China, as in almost 
all of East Asia, it is the food grain of choice. Like tea, rice is believed to 
have come to China from Southeast Asia, but in the dim past of prehis- 



14 TAI PA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


tory. Rice since ancient times has been the basis of all meals for peasant 
and aristocrat alike. Steamed rice, fried rice, curried rice, rice cakes, rice 
pudding, rice wine, rice liquor and even rice paper — this grain has even 
been used for paying taxes through the centuries in the Orient. In Japan, 
Inari is the God of Rice, and is symbolized by the fox. During most of 
Chinese history, the Emperor himself, as the Son of Heaven, would cere¬ 
moniously plow a furrow on the Lunar New Year to ensure a good har¬ 
vest for all his subjects. 

But rice never has caught on equally in the West, and since it is a rela¬ 
tively cheap bulk item carried in huge rice barges by the local people 
themselves, it will stand at the low-priced end among the cargo items 
with which our game will concern itself. 

We will use pepper as a representative of spices in general. (Another 
item we'll introduce in a moment is silk. Since for playing ease we want 
to be able to select items by just their first letter, we'll use pepper as a 
stand-in for all spices.) 

Spices are what drove the Portuguese to invade the eastern oceans, 
competing with the Arabs, who controlled the long-established trade in 
spice from the Orient to the Occident. 

Rounding the south of Africa before the end of the fifteenth century, 
the Portuguese soon established themselves at Hormuz on the Persian 
Gulf, defeated the Arab fleets, drove on to take Goa in India, Malacca in 
Malaya, and eventually to set up "factories" (actually trading posts) on 
the so-called Spice Islands of the Moluccas in the East Indies. 

A desire to have a piece of the spice trade was Spain's primary motiva¬ 
tion for financing the voyages of Christopher Columbus, resulting in 
his accidental discovery of the Americas instead of a short-cut to the 
East Indies. 

Silk is another item we are starting to initialize in line 40. 

The ancient Romans, trading through intermediaries, imported so 
much Chinese silk from the Han Empire, the one-sided trade drained the 
Roman Empire of much of its gold and silver, doing severe damage to the 
Roman economy. 

Later, during Europe's Middle Ages, Maffio and Niccolo Polo, Venetian 
merchants, followed the same inland Silk Route which had linked the 
Chinese and Romans. (Eleven years later in 1271, Marco Polo, Niccolo's 



Initializing Ourselves into the Past: CHAPTER THREE 15 


-: - oined them in another visit to China. There Marco noted that many 
European Christians were already present, proselytizing or serving the 
‘._biai Khan as soldiers of fortune.) 

The production of silk was an extremely labor-intensive industry. After 
- itching, 700,000 silkworms weigh in at only a pound. Tenderly cared for 
md hand-fed mulberry leaves for over a month, that single pound of cat- 
emdars turns into five tones of mature silkworms! By that time, they've 
eaten twelve tons of mulberry leaves. After all this, only around 150 
tvunds of silk is produced, and then only after laboriously reeling the 
silk to make thread. Is it any wonder that silk was expensive? 

In the late 1700's the British were attempting to make their growing tea 
and silk imports less damaging to their economy than silk had been to 
the Romans fifteen hundred years earlier. They needed export items to 
balance the trade, so that all their silver and gold would not end up in 
Chinese hands. They struck upon cotton from Bombay (in the Surat area 
of northwestern India) and opium (from Calcutta in the Bengal region of 
northeastern India). Since the British controlled India, they could get 
these items quite cheaply. The moneys made by selling these items in 
China balanced the tea and silk trade with China. 

As the years passed, opium began to replace cotton in its economic 
value to the British. 

Opium was not unknown to the Chinese, but it had traditionally been 
used very sparingly and as a medicine, much as it and other opiates are 
now used in Western pharmacology. But the importation of massive 
amounts of this narcotic drug by the British, at a time of dynastic decline 
and decadence in China, caused the opium habit to sweep across that 
country like a plague. 

Opium so altered the balance of trade between the British and the Chi¬ 
nese that a drain on Chinese silver bullion caused a rapid fall in silver's 
exchange rate with the more common copper currency of China, the 
"cash". Another effect upon China was the ability of this narcotic trade 
to corrupt officials. The anti-Manchu Triad secret societies were in the 
forefront of handling the Chinese side of the trade, often intimidating or 
assassinating any Chinese official who might try to suppress opium. 

With between two and ten million habitual opium smokers in China by 
the early 1830's, many patriotic Chinese became alarmed, though others, 
including high officials, connived with the opium traders. 


16 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Despite the rampant corruption of the time, one official. Commis¬ 
sioner Lin Tse-hsu (1785-1850), was brave, determined, and incorruptible 
enough to attack the opium trade head-on. Ordered by the Manchu 
Emperor to suppress the opium trade, he arrived in the southern Chi¬ 
nese trading port of Canton in 1839. Lin began to close down the city's 
opium dens, and to arrest and execute Chinese opium traders. He wrote 
letters to Queen Victoria, with well-reasoned arguments against opium. 

In one such letter, Lin wrote, "Suppose there were people from 
another country who carried opium for sale in England and seduced your 
people into buying and smoking it; certainly [you] would deeply hate it 
and be bitterly aroused . . ." 

Commissioner Lin impounded 20,000 chests (about 133 pounds of 
opium each) from the British traders. He then had the opium burned 
publicly, in an act which is still considered heroic by Chinese of all politi¬ 
cal persuasions. 

But the British were not amused. 

England launched the Opium War (1839-1842) in large part to make 
certain that the trade, so important to the British imperial economy, 
though physically, mentally, politically and economically destructive to 
the Chinese, could be maintained at any cost. 

It is in this opium trade that the taipans — such as Jardine, Matheson 
and Company, and Dent and Company — made the lion's share of their 
fortunes. 

Since lines 30 and 40 READ information from DATA lines, let's just skip 
to those DATA lines right now. 

b5 RE11 INITIALIZATION DATA (70-110) 

70 DATA HONGKONGiFOOCHOWi 

shanghai-i Nagasaki-.Manila-, 

SINGAP0RE-.BATAVIA-.SAIG0N-. 

CALCUTTAiLIVERPOOL 

SO DATA JAN-iFEB-iMAR-.APR-iMAY-.JUN 


B1 DATA JUL-.AUG-.SEP-.0CT -.NOV-iDEC 



Initializing Ourselves into the Past: CHAPTER THREE 17 


= : DATA OPIUM-,SILK-, 

TEAtARMS-iPEPPER-iRICE 

SOD DATA fiiE-iE-iMiS-iS-ifi-iS-ilifl-iM-iBi 
Ti3i3iti5i4ibi4iEiflibi5i 
3 -i 3 -i 4 -i 7 i4i4iEi4i5i4i3i5i 
3i4iS-.SiE-.ti3ili4iS-.3-.3-. 

liSibi3i4iSi3i1iTili1iS 


In detail, lines 30 and 40, working with DATA lines 70 through 100, do 
as follows: 

The "DIM" statement in line 30 dimensions (sets aside variable space) 
for a one-dimensional string array to hold the names of the months of the 
year: "M$(ll)". (It only has to be dimensioned to 11 rather than 12 
because we will call January month number "0". In Applesoft BASIC, we 
can save valuable memory space by always making use of zero as a legiti¬ 
mate subscript of dimensioned variables.) 

"G$(5)" is used to hold the names of our six items of trade, in each of 
the ten ports of call. Another numerical array which we dimension is 
"GG(5)". This stores the amount of each item of cargo stored in our 
Hongkong "godown" (a term of Malay origin meaning "warehouse", 
which the British brought with them to East Asia). "L(9,5)" and "H(9,5)" 
are used, respectively, to keep track of the highest, and the lowest, prices 
encountered in the port we are visiting. 



JjmcLiasn- 













T A I P A N 

.4 Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Taipan Geography 

CHAPTER FOUR 


We'll be visiting some very exotic ports o' call in Taipan. So the next thing 
we do in line 30 is start a loop to READ strings from DATA line 70 into 
L$(I)". The loop increments the variable "I" from 0 to 9. This causes the 
subscript of our "location" string to change upon each READ. The net 
result is that L$(0) will hold the string, "HONGKONG", and L$(9) will 
be "LIVERPOOL". (The subscripts 1 through 8 will cause the location 
string to hold the other ports' names.) 

Most people we run into don't really know much about geography. If 
we ask the average person "where is Singapore?", we'll probably get a 
guess like, "Isn't it in China?" 

Let's give you a chance (in case you don't already know all your geog¬ 
raphy) to be in a position to feel superior to such people. You've no doubt 
heard of such a thing as "Restaurant French" (useful to the mainly non- 
French-speaker when ordering food at Chez Continental), or "Take-Out 
Chinese" (needed when ordering some mouth-watering fried noodles). 
These are handy little miniaturized versions of languages which many of 
us learn just so that we know enough to read a menu and order some¬ 
thing we love to eat — rather than pointing to a menu item in hopeful 


19 



20 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


ignorance, and getting some exotic and mysterious thing which, when it 
arrives, we're not sure is even food. 

We're going to cover something the Authors will call "Taipan Geogra¬ 
phy", a sub-set of world geography which will be limited to ten ports, 
eight in East Asia, and one each in Central Asia and Western Europe. 

Hongkong (usually written in two words as "Hong Kong" these days) 
is a British Crown Colony. Its official name is Victoria, but hardly anyone 
has ever called it that. 

In July of the year 1839, several drunken British sailors killed Lin Wei- 
hsi, a Chinese villager. The Superintendent of British Trade, Captain 
Charles Elliot, refusing to recognize Chinese jurisdiction over British sub¬ 
jects, would not hand over the sailors to Chinese justice. Commissioner 
Lin Tse-hsu, he of opium-burning fame, stepped up his pressure tactics 
against the British traders in Canton, forcing them to withdraw first to 
Macau, then to the coastal islands of South China. The traders settled as 
squatters on the island of Hongkong in August of 1839. 

Hongkong island, when the traders first occupied it, was a mountain¬ 
ous and rocky island with only a few small fishing villages. It lies at the 
mouth of the Pearl River, downstream some ninety miles from Canton, 
the traditional trading port of China. Across the wide mouth of the Pearl 
from Hongkong is Macau, the Portuguese colony which had been estab¬ 
lished in 1557. Between Hongkong island and the Chinese mainland is a 
fine natural harbor, usually protected by terrain from the devastating 
typhoons of the South China Sea. Before Lin could shake a stick at them, 
the traders, sailors and British officials on the island numbered in the 
thousands, and about fifty ships were anchored in Hongkong harbor. 
Commissioner Lin attempted to starve out the squatters, but enterprising 
Chinese merchants easily got through the blockade. 

The Opium war ensued, with the British military taking control of sev¬ 
eral coastal Chinese cities. The Chinese, soundly beaten by the British, 
agreed in 1842 to open the so-called "Treaty Ports" of Canton, Amoy, Foo¬ 
chow, Ningpo and Shanghai to the British traders. Another concession 
by the Chinese was Hongkong, which then became officially a British 
possession. 

Eventually, the Crown Colony grew in size, as the mainland penin¬ 
sula of Kowloon, and the adjacent "New Territories" were added to 
British control. 

Its strategic location, its fine harbor, and the fact that it was outside the 



Taipan Geography: CHAPTER FOUR 21 


control of the Chinese government, all combined to make Hongkong the 
headquarters, refuge, and warehouse of the China Traders. 

Of the five Treaty Ports, we will only use two, Foochow and Shanghai, 
as representatives. 

Foochow, capital of Fukien province, had also been the capital of the 
Min kingdom (909-944 AD) during a period when China was broken up 
into ten kingdoms. After internal rebellions partly disrupted foreign 
trade to the south along the coast during the middle of the nineteenth 
century, Foochow became an important import and export trade center. 
Tea from Foochow was famous throughout the world. 

Shanghai is positioned in the middle of China's coast, at the juncture 
of the East China and the Yellow Seas, and at the mouth of the Yangtse 
River. The Yangtse gives Shanghai access to a huge slice of China by river 
barge traffic, through the Yangtse River basin and with connections via 
the Grand Canal to the Huai and Yellow River basins. 

Shanghai became the most Westernized city in China, with traders 
and banks from many foreign countries setting up business there. As 
foreign countries wielded greater and greater power in China, it even¬ 
tually came to pass that signs in Shanghai parks read "No Dogs or Chi¬ 
nese Allowed". 

Outside of China itself, the taipans roamed East Asia widely. One 
place in which they traded was Japan. 

For more than two hundred years after 1641, Nagasaki, on the southern 
island of Kyushu, was the only place in Japan where foreigners were 
allowed to trade. The Dutch traders (who were the only Westerners 
allowed to trade with Japan), were kept in near-prison conditions, con¬ 
fined to the tiny man-made island of Deshima in Nagasaki harbor. These 
restrictions lasted until after Commodore Perry of the United States 
coerced the Shogun into approving the Treaty of Kanagawa in 1854. That 
treaty, and a commercial treaty negotiated by the American diplomat, 
Townsend Harris in 1858, opened Japan to the West, and to the taipans. 

Our next port o' call is Manila. Although other Europeans may have 
visited what today is known as the Philippines, it was Fernando Magel¬ 
lan, a Portuguese in the service of Spain, who attempted to take these 
islands for the Spanish crown. In 1521, after having rounded the south¬ 
ern tip of South America and crossing the Pacific, Magellan landed on the 
tiny island of Mactan, just off the central island of Cebu. 



22 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Before the Spanish arrived, the Philippines were an island group with 
separate, small tribal groups and local Muslim sultanates. To the Span¬ 
ish, who hoped to find spices there, these islands looked to be easy pick¬ 
ings. In a demonstration of macho which might have been admirable 
(had it not been fatal), Magellan showed the Spanish flag against hostile 
"savages" led by a local chief, Lapu-Lapu. Magellan grew tired of staying 
within the protection of his ships' guns, and personally led soldiers onto 
the beach to find the "enemy". There he found them, just out of the pro¬ 
tective cover of his ships' guns. The native warriors had dug trenches on 
the beach. Bursting forth from the concealment of these trenches, Lapu- 
Lapu's fighters fell upon the surprised Spanish, killing Magellan. The 
survivors of the expeditionary fleet returned to Spain under Captain del 
Cano, completing the first circumnavigation of the globe. 

In 1565, Miguel Lopez de Legaspi arrived on Cebu and began a system¬ 
atic conquest of the Philippines. By 1571, Legaspi had established the 
Intramuros ("within the walls") fortress at Manila, on the northern 
island of Luzon. (The Spanish had found a thriving small native town at 
the site of the Intramuros, named Maynilad, controlled by Raja Sul- 
ayman of the newly arrived Muslim faith. In the southernmost islands of 
the Philippines the Muslim "moros" (moors) remained rebellious, and 
have never been truly integrated into the Philippines.) 

Manila stands on the shore of one of this planet's greatest natural har¬ 
bors. The Spanish found that the Philippines lacked the spices which 
they had coveted — they had been shut out of the spice trade by the ear¬ 
lier arrival of the Portuguese in the Moluccas to the south. But the Span¬ 
iards soon adapted themselves, using Manila harbor as a transshipment 
point for a trade in silk from China and other goods from the Orient. 
These goods were traded for silver coins from Acapulco in Mexico (the so- 
called "Dollars Mex" which were an international currency in Asia for 
centuries). This commerce came to be called the Manila Galleon trade. 
Following favorable winds, the Spanish found the best route to the east¬ 
ward leg to Mexico was far to the north, where they would pick up the 
westerly tradewinds. In returning to the Philippines from Acapulco, the 
Manila Galleons would take a more southerly route. For well over two 
centuries (1572-1815) the Manila Galleon trade continued almost 
unchanged. Incredibly, the Spanish never discovered the Hawaiian 
Islands, though their huge galleons sailed past them to the north and to 
the south all those years. 

Singapore is located just a few miles north of the equator, on an island 
at the tip of the Malayan peninsula, and at the south-eastern end of the 



Taipan Geography: CHAPTER FOUR 23 


straits of Malacca. Since most sea traffic between Europe and East Asia 
pass through the Straits, Singapore's location is strategic. 

The story is told that when an ancient Buddhist prince saw the island, 
he named it Singa Pura, or "Lion City", because he was supposed to 
have seen lions there. (This was in the days before eyeglasses: there have 
never been lions in the area of Singapore.) The Malays who have long 
lived there called the place Tumasek, or Sea Town. 

When the British first came, in January of 1819, to establish a base in 
Singapore, they found an island little inhabited except by a few pirates. 
Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles was the brilliant and energetic Imperialist 
who built modern Singapore. Originally an entrepot port (for warehous¬ 
ing and transshipment of goods) for East and South East Asia, Singapore 
has grown into a progressive and modern manufacturing center as well. 

Perhaps nowhere else in the world can such a population mix be 
found: Singapore has long had a population of Chinese, Malays, Indi¬ 
ans, Pakistanis and Europeans. 

The taipans of old would crowd around the Long Bar at the Raffles 
Hotel, swapping stories and plotting intrigues, perhaps drinking the 
pink gin concoction known as a Singapore Sling, which originated at the 
bar. The Long Bar and the Raffles still exist, echoing with faint memories 
of the time of the taipans. 

If you can identify Batavia, you're well ahead of the pack in this Taipan 
Geography lesson. Because you can't find it on maps these days. 

At the west end of the north coast of the heavily populated island of 
Java, Batavia was established in 1619 by the ruthless Dutchman, Jan 
Pieterzoon Coen. The city had modern European buildings, yet 
remained dangerously unsanitary and unhealthy in the tropical climate. 

The Dutch competed intensely with other Europeans, stealing the 
spice trade from the Portuguese and setting up a system of "factory" 
posts linking the Netherlands with their eastern enterprises. Dutch posts 
were established in India, Ceylon, Burma, Siam, Cambodia, Vietnam, 
Taiwan and Japan. 

The Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie) 
soon dominated the Indonesian islands, developing a form of colonialism 
which may have been the harshest ever devised. In an effort to control 
spice trade completely, the Dutch destroyed all clove trees throughout 
Indonesia, growing them only on the island of Amboina, and generally 



24 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


would allow only certain spices or crops, such as nutmeg, to grow on 
selected islands. The effect of this imposed monoculture was often to 
impoverish or starve the local populations. But this was of little concern 
to the profit-seeking Dutch Company. Chinese middle-men were used by 
the Dutch to farm taxes and crops from the native people. 

When the Japanese invaded the Dutch East Indies during World War 
II, they renamed the city "Jakarta", which it had been called in ancient 
times. At the end of the war, the British forces attempted to re-establish 
the Dutch in Indonesia. When the British landed in the fall of 1945, they 
at first found the Indonesian nationalists fighting the Japanese. The Brit¬ 
ish, rather than disarm the Japanese troops, instead ordered them to con¬ 
tinue fighting the Indonesians, in order to put the Dutch colonial 
administrators back in the saddle. The attempt of the Dutch to regain 
control of Indonesia was long and bitter, but resulted in an independent 
Indonesia in 1949, with its capital at Jakarta. 

Though Batavia is better known to the world as Jakarta, our next port, 
Saigon, is better known by that old name than by the official new one, 
"Ho Chi Minh City". 

French interests in Vietnam began as early as 1648, through well- 
organized Jesuit missionary work. Known in the 1800's as Annam (from 
the Chinese words An Nan, meaning "Pacify the South"), Vietnam had 
gradually become a French colony between 1858 and 1885. Saigon, situ¬ 
ated not far from the sea on the navigable Saigon river, was rarely a capi¬ 
tal during the history of Vietnam. But it was certainly the most vigorous 
commercial center of that country. The administrative center of Cochin 
China, as the French called the southern rice-growing delta area of Viet¬ 
nam, Saigon (and its Chinese quarter, Cho Lon) became one of the busi¬ 
est ports in Southeast Asia. 

Calcutta, in the Bengal region of India, was among the British Empire's 
major ports, beginning with a factory post there in 1690. At first, the 
trade from Calcutta was mainly in textiles, sugar and raw Bengal silk, 
traded to Europe. This commerce developed into the so-called "country 
trade", with private British traders carrying the goods. By the late 1700's, 
this "country trade" was turning toward China as a market, and to 
opium as a profitable trade item. Opium was harvested in the Bengal as a 
monopoly of The Honorable British East India Company (originally 
named "The Governor and Merchants of London Trading into the East 
Indies", and granted a monopoly on trade in the Pacific and Indian 



Taipan Geography: CHAPTER FOUR 25 


Oceans by Queen Elizabeth in 1600). The Company auctioned the opium 
to private traders in Calcutta. 

The Honorable Company was something the likes of which boggles 
modern minds. A joint-stock company founded for private profit, it had 
its own British military force assigned to it, numbering over 20,000 sol¬ 
diers before 1800 in India alone. It had warships, and it had powerful 
influence over British policies. 

By the time of our game, 1860, opium from Calcutta had become an 
established institution in Asian trade. 

The English port city of Liverpool will represent British and European 
ports in general in Taipan. Through this port on the Mersey estuary and 
the Irish Sea, passed a large share of Britain's trade with the Orient. 

A sailing ship in the 1860's would take roughly from six to eight 
months to reach Hongkong from Liverpool, sailing around Africa's Cape 
of Good Hope, into the Indian Ocean, and through the Straits of Malacca 
into the China Seas. The Dutch had discovered the technique of continu¬ 
ing directly eastward after rounding the Cape of Good Hope. This prac¬ 
tice allowed the "Roaring Forties" (high winds which whip around 
Antarctica in an eastward direction at about forty degrees south latitude) 
to push ships quickly toward East Asia, without the need to stop in India. 
Before using these winds, the eastward passage had taken even longer. 








T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


A Space-Time Machine 

CHAPTER FIVE 


We're not yet finished laying the foundation for the environment of our 
game. The next loop in line READs in the abbreviations of the months, 
from "JAN" to "DEC" into "M$(I)" ; from DATA line 80. Likewise, the last 
loop in this line READs in DATA from line 90, naming the items of trade. 

Line 40 sets up "nested" loops (one within another) which READ in 
DATA from line 100, then run it through a funny-looking formula to 
arrive at a raw base price for each item in each port. 

That funny-looking formula takes a simple, one digit number from line 
100 and multiplies it according to the type of item. For instance, opium 
will always cost more than rice. We're using this formula, rather than just 
putting the whole numbers in DATA statements, simply to save memory 
space. (Saving space in microcomputer memory is an art and science 
which is as necessary as it is evil.) 

These base prices will later be further processed upon first arriving in 
each port, to give us the actual prices. This is done after the final state¬ 
ment of line 40, "GOSUB 180". 

Let's skip to line 180 so we can see what it does . . . 


27 



28 TAI PAN : A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


175 REM PRICE VARIATION SUBROUTINE (ISO) 

ISO FOR I = □ TO 5: 

GP (I) = INT (AP(L-iI) + ( RND (1) * APCL-.I))): 
NEXT I: 

RETURN 


Line 180 takes the "base price" variable array "AP(L,I)", adds a ran¬ 
dom fraction of itself, knocks off any decimal fractions with the "INT" 
function, then puts the resulting number, the actual local item prices, 
into the one-dimensional "GP(I)" array. The variable "L" is the number of 
the port we are in, and "I" is incremented through the loop from 0 to 5. 
We never did give a value to "L", but since it was never set, it automati¬ 
cally has a value of zero. But since zero is the number of our home-port, 
Hongkong, we're sitting pretty. (The Authors have used this method 
generally. All undimensioned variables which should start as zero aren't 
initialized, as both a labor- and memory-saving technique.) 

We then have the "NEXT I" statement to match the "FOR I = 0 TO 5" 
statement, and a RETURN to get us back to where we started. 

Now let's go back and continue to line 50: 

50 FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

READ L0(I): 

NEXT I: 

D = 1000: 

Y = IflUO: 

GT = l: 

C = WOO: 

MU = 50: 

SH = MW: 

SR = l: 

G = 1: 

V(0) = l: 

G0SUB 5000: 

X$ = 

G0SUB 550: 



A Space-Time Machine: CHAPTER FIVE 29 


HOME: 
GOTO 120 


In line 50, we feed numbers into array "LO(I)" from DATA line 110. 
These values will later be processed further to give the ports we'll visit 
relative distances from one another. 

Here's the data which is used by line 50: 

110 DATA 21 -i 14 t 7 -i 0 t 35 n 

45 -.5b-. 42 ,A4i 200 


We set up several other very important variables in line 50. With 
D = 1000" we set the player's debt to the Triad moneylender, Elder 
Brother Wu, to 1000. "A thousand what?", you may ask. 

There were many currencies used in the China Trade, including British 
pounds, Chinese Taels, Dollars Mex, and the copper Chinese "cash". For 
game purposes, we aren't going to specify what currency we're using. 
(That way we'll avoid both currency exchange problems, and the need to 
explain prices which might not be exactly accurate historically!) Remem¬ 
ber, this is primarily a game, not an exact historical simulation. The 
Authors usually will choose game playability as opposed to literal accu¬ 
racy in such situations. 

Continuing with line 50, the next variable we have is "Y = 1860". This 
sets the year to 1860. "GT = 1" sets a variable which keeps track of "game 
time", the total supposed days elapsed during a game. "C = 400" sets the 
player's cash to 400 (some things). "MW = 50" sets the maximum weight 
of cargo that the player's vessel can carry to 50 units of cargo. "SH = MW" 
sets the portion of that capacity which is presently available in the ship's 
hold. Since we start with an empty hold, SH starts as the same as MW. 
"SR = 1" sets the vessel's state of repair at 100%. Whenever we print out 
the value of SR, we'll be converting it to percentage form. Thus an "SR" 
value of .10234 would print out as "10%". (Anything less than 10% state 
of repair, as we'll see when we encounter pirates, causes our ship to sink, 
and our game to unceremoniously end.) With "G = 1", we have given our 
craft one cannon with which to try to defend itself. "V(O) = 1", by setting 
a single element of the V(L) array to a value of one, tells the computer 
that our coming visit to Hongkong will be our first to that port o' call. The 



30 TAiPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


V(L) array keeps track of how many times we've visited each port — a 
nice tidbit of information which the program will make available later. 

We GOSUB 590 because of a peculiarity of Applesoft BASIC. Our 
game uses random numbers a great deal, to simulate the ebbs and flows 
of reality. Some microcomputers get these random numbers from 
"noise" generators which they otherwise use for sound effects. Other 
machines, including the Apple II, simulate randomness by using com¬ 
plex mathematical formulas to draw out pseudo-random numbers from a 
large built-in list of values. There is basically no problem with this second 
method, as long as we can't predict which number will come up next. But 
with the Apple II, the fact is that, every time the machine is turned on, 
the same list is processed the same way. (Other machines which use 
pseudo-random numbers derived from a list have a "RANDOM" or a 
"RANDOMIZE" statement in BASIC which "re-seeds" the random 
number generator to produce essentially unpredictable numbers.) 

The net result of the way the Apple II handles random numbers is that 
it's possible to have every "random" occurrence become completely pre¬ 
dictable to an experienced player. Prices, events, pirate attacks, etc., 
could happen in the same dreary order. We need some way to randomize 
our not-quite-random number generator. The Randomizer Subroutine at 
line 590 does this for Taipan. So here it is: 

565 REM RANDOMIZER SUBROUTINE (510-511) 

510 VTAB 15: 

HTAB 8: 

PRINT "PRESS <"i: 

FLASH: 

PRINT "SPACEBAR"^: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT "> TO START"i : 

GOSUB L0: 

IF X$ = " " THEN RETURN 


511 X = INT ( RND (1) * 1) + l: 
GOTO 510 


A Space-Time Machine: CHAPTER FIVE 31 


Our Randomizer simply cycles and recycles itself endlessly until the 
player presses the spacebar. Each time this line loops back upon itself, the 
X = INT ( RND (1) * 9) + l" statement pulls a pseudo-random number 
from the random number generator. Since it does this very quickly and 
very often, it should be impossible for a player to know how many times 
the subroutine has cycled. Each time it has cycled, another number in the 
machine's list of numbers has been used. (We had to use the statement, 
X$ = * " in line 50 prior to calling the Randomizer subroutine, because 
had we not, there could already be a space character in X$ before we 
wanted it, thus defeating our purpose. The subroutine at line 60, which 
will be discussed later, simply collects a character from the keyboard to 
put in X$. In this case, we're looking for a "space" character.) The play¬ 
er's unpredictable timing in pressing the spacebar will effectively re-seed 
the random number generator, making certain that each game is different 
from the last. 

Next in line 50, we use the statement, "HOME", which clears the 
screen. We are now finished with initialization. 

Here, once again, are the lines we've used so far, so you can check your 
exact typing: 

5 REN INITIALIZATION (10-50) 

10 HONE: 

A$ = " 

ld$ = "ELDER BROTHER UU": 

LY$ = "LI YUEN": 

YS$ = "YANAT0 & SMYTHE": 

TC$ = "On Sn Tn An Pn OR R" 

11 B* = " 

(Note that there are 40 spaces within the quotes which define A$, and 
39 spaces in the quotes of B$, in line 11.) 



32 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


SO VTAB 4: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

HTAB 13: 

PRINT "T A I P A N:": 
NORMAL: 

HTAB 13: 

PRINT "_ 


(The last "PRINT" statement in line 20 has 17 underline characters.) 


El SPEED = 100: 

VTAB T: 

HTAB 14: 

PRINT "A GAME IN": 

PRINT TAB( 1S)^"C 0 N T E X T n : 
PRINT: 

PRINT TAB ( 14 ) =i "HAYDEN BOOK CO." 

EE SPEED = ESS: 

VTAB IS: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

30 DIM M*(ll)iG*(S)-.AP(Ti5)i 
GG(5) iLH-.5) -.GP(S) V (T) : 

FOR I = D TO 1: 

READ L$(I): 

NEXT I: 

FOR I = 0 TO 11: 

READ M$(I): 

NEXT I: 

FOR I = D TO 5: 


A Space-Time Machine: CHAPTER FIVE 33 


READ G$(I) : 

NEXT I 

40 FOR I = 0 TO 1: 

FOR J = 0 TO 5: 

READ APdiJ) : 

AP(IiJ) = AP (11J) * b a (S - J): NEXT J I: 
GOSUB IflO 

SO FOR I = 0 TO 
READ LOCI): 

NEXT I: 

D = 1000: 

V = IfitO: 

GT = l: 

C = 400: 

Nld = SO: 

SH = Util: 

SR = l: 

G = l: 

V(0) = l: 

GOSUB 5000: 

X$ = 

GOSUB STO: 

HONE: 

GOTO 120 

bS REN INITIALIZATION DATA (70-110) 

70 DATA HONGKONG-.FOOCHOU-, 

SHANGHAIiNAGASAKI tNANILAt 
SINGAPORE i BAT A VI An SAIGON-, 

CALCUTTA-i LIVERPOOL 



34 

TAIPAN: 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 

ao 

DATA 

JAN 1 FEB 1 MAR 1 APR 1 MAY 1 JUN 

fii 

DATA 

JUL 1 AUG 1 SEP 1 OCT 1 NOV 1 DEC 

TO 

DATA 

OPIUMiSILKi 

TEA 1 ARMS 1 PEPPER 1 RICE 

100 

DATA 

fli2i2iMi5i2ifii2ilifliMi3 


T-i3i3-itn5-.M-.tnM-.2-.fi-.b-.S-i 

3i3iMi7iMiMi2iMi5iMi3i5i 

3iMi5i5i2ibi3iliMi5i3i3i 

li5itn3iMi5i3iTiTiliTi5 

110 DATA BlilMi7i0i35i 

MTi5biMBiflMi200 

175 REM PRICE VARIATION SUBROUTINE (ISO) 

ISO FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

GP(I) = INT (AP(LiI) + ( RND (1) * AP(LiI))) 
NEXT I: 

RETURN 

SfiS REI1 RANDOMIZER SUBROUTINE (5T0-5T1) 

5T0 VTAB 15: 

HTAB fl: 

PRINT "PRESS <"i: 

FLASH: 

PRINT "SPACEBAR"i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT "> TO START"i : 

GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = " " THEN RETURN 





A Space-Time Machine: CHAPTER FIVE 35 


ST1 X = INT ( RND (1) * T) + 1: 

GOTO 510 

Now we've used our Apple II for a purpose never envisioned by its 
designers: it has operated as a space-time machine to initialize us onto 
the China coast in the 1860's! 








T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


To Market , To Market 

CHAPTER SIX 


The Main Display routine begins: 

115 REM MAIN DISPLAY <120-150) 

120 GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 220 

With those simple instructions, we tell our Apple II to show our Main 
Display ('GOSUB 130"), then, with "GOTO 220", to show the local mar¬ 
ket prices and our trading menu. 

Let's continue with our Main Display subroutine first: 

130 VTAB l: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT "PORT "iL$(L)^ : 

HTAB 2fl: 

PRINT M$(M)i". " i D A + li"-,"iY 


37 



38 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


This line does the following: 

First, the cursor is positioned at the upper left-hand corner of the 
screen, then it prints the word, "PORT", followed by a space and then 
the name of the port itself. (Remember the "L$(L)" array?) Farther to the 
right on the first line, at horizontal position 28, is printed the abbrevia¬ 
tion of the month. (Originally the value of the month variable, M, will be 
"O", so "M$(M)" will read "JAN".) We then print a period to neaten the 
abbreviation, and follow this with a space. Next, the day of the month is 
printed. Note that the variable for the day of the month is DA, to which 
we add the number 1 before printing it. This is done because the com¬ 
puter will actually be counting the days of the month from 0 to 29. This 
will appear to the player as days 1 to 30. Of course, there are not thirty 
days to each month, but this seems a reasonable way of doing things, 
considering the memory-eating alternative of setting up an exact calen¬ 
dar! (Once more, "gaming" takes precedence over "realism".) Finally 
line 130 prints the year, variable Y. (We previously used Y to set the 
game's beginning year to 1860.) 

Continuing our Main Display subroutine, we have lines 140 and 141: 

140 VTAB 2: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "CASH "i: 

<2 = C: 

G0SUB 1330: 

NORMAL: 

VTAB 2: 

HTAB 2fl: 

PRINT "GUNS n \G: 

VTAB 3: 

PRINT "DEBT : 

a = D: 

G0SUB 1330: 

VTAB 3: 

HTAB 26: 

PRINT "HOLD "i: 

Q = SH: 



To Market, To Market . . CHAPTER SIX 39 


GOSUB 1330 

141 VTAB 4: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "GOODS ABOARD SHIP HONGKONG GODOlilN": 
NORMAL 


A player will often find that quantities in Taipan (such as cash, debt, 
and trade goods) will become enormously large. Applesoft BASIC is 
designed so that it will allow the display of numbers under one billion 
(1,000,000,000) in a normal fashion, but it will display numbers from one 
billion on (including negative numbers) in a computer version of "scien¬ 
tific notation". 

This display of big numbers is a bit different than the usual sort of sci¬ 
entific notation. In the non-computer type of scientific notation which 
many of us have encountered in school, one billion would look like this: 

1 x la^ 


This could be written out in words as "one times ten to the ninth 
power". But one billion, as displayed by our Apple II, would normally 
look like: 

lE + DI 


Not too swift, actually. Not something which a player who is not famil¬ 
iar with computers would be likely to understand! (Even the non¬ 
computer style of showing scientific notation is hardly neat or convenient 
for the layperson to comprehend — the computer version is just worse.) 

Yet even using an awkward version of scientific notation, numbers may 
simply get too long to display in the number of spaces we have available 
for them in the 40-column format we're using for the Apple II. So, as a 
solution for these problems, we've set up a special Big Number subrou¬ 
tine: 


1325 REM BIG NUMBER SUBROUTINE (133D-137D) 



40 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


1330 IF ABS 02) < lEb THEN PRINT INT 02) i: 
NORMAL: 

PRINT " 

RETURN 

1331 IF ABS 02) < 1ET THEN (2 = (2 / lEb: 

(2$ = "MIL": 

GOTO 1335 

133E IF ABS 02) < 1E1E THEN (2 = (2 / 1ET: 

(2$ = "BIL": 

GOTO 1335 

1333 IF ABS 02) > = 1E1E THEN Q = Q / 1E1E 
(2$ = "TRL": 

GOTO 1335 

1335 PRINT INT 02) =,(2$:. : 

NORMAL: 

PRINT n 

1337 RETURN 

1340 FOR I = IE TO Ifl 

1345 HTAB 1 

1350 VTAB I: 

PRINT A$=, 

13b0 NEXT I 


13bS PRINT: 



To Market, To Market . . CHAPTER SIX 41 


VTAB 15 

1370 RETURN 


Look back at line 140. There we set the value of variable Q to equal C 
(our cash). We did this just before GOSUBbing 1330. The Big Number 
subroutine takes this value held temporarily in Q and, if the number is 
less than one million (or negative one million), simply prints it in neatly 
formatted style. 

If the number is a positive or negative number of at least one million 
and less than a billion, the number is formatted so that . . . 

In 543-,144-, 415 


. . . would come out looking like: 

134.SMIL. 

Numbers in the billions and trillions are handled in a similar manner 
by the Big Number subroutine. The abbreviations "MIL.", "BIL." or 
"TRL." are shown in reverse video to catch the player's eye. 

Negative numbers will be indicated by a minus sign (-) to their left. 

The way the Big Number subroutine handles astronomical-sized quan¬ 
tities gives the player meaningful information without making havoc of 
our display with numbers which get too long for the space we have avail¬ 
able. We use the Big Number subrouting three times in line 140 alone, 
and we'll be calling on it to help us with other potentially huge numbers 
whenever we need to. 

So, in line 140 we've printed our cash (originally four hundred), the 
number of guns with which our vessel is equipped (one for starters), our 
debt to Elder Brother Wu (one thousand as the game begins), and the 
available hold capacity of our vessel (fifty thus far). Line 141 next displays 
a bright bar across the screen, with the words, "GOODS", "ABOARD 
SHIP", and "HONGKONG GODOWN" in reverse video embedded in 
the bar. (Hongkong is where our only godown — warehouse — is 
located.) 



42 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


The last line of our Main Display subroutine is: 

ISO FOR I = □ TO 5: 

VTAB 5 + I: 

PRINT G$(I) : 

VTAB 5 + I: 

HTAB 11: 

PRINT CHR$ (133)^: 

Q = SG(I) : 

GOSUB 1330: 

VTAB S + I: 

HTAB Eb: 

PRINT CHR$ (133) ; : 
a = GG(I) : 

GOSUB 1330: 

NEXT I: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

RETURN 


This line displays the quantities of goods we have aboard ship and in 
our Hongkong godown. 

We start a loop, incrementing from 0 to 5. Within the loop, we first 
"VTAB 5 + 1", and then "PRINT G$(I)". This method allows us to show 
G$(I), the names of the trade items, in neat columns, one item name to a 
line. Then another VTAB and an "HTAB 11" put our cursor eleven 
columns to the right, so that it displays vertical bars, CHR$(133), to the 
right of the item names. Next, the first call of the Big Number subroutine 
(GOSUB 1330) formats the numbers of items aboard ship. Then we go 
over a few more columns with another VTAB and HTAB, and display 
another vertical bar, with the Big Number subroutine now formatting the 
numbers for the amount of each item stored in our godown. After we've 
displayed information on all our goods aboard ship or stored, the NEXT I 
ends the loop. We then do an INVERSE, and print a thick bright horizon¬ 
tal bar (A$) on the next line. Last, we execute NORMAL, and RETURN 
from the subroutine. 



To Market, To Market .... CHAPTER SIX 43 


Okay. Now we've finished our Main Display, and have RETURNed to 
line 120. Line 120 immediately sends us away with "GOTO 220". (This 
time we seem to have outstayed our welcome — we're kicked off the 
premises without so much as a "y'all come back, hear?") 

Lines 220 and 221 start our Market routine: 

212 REM MARKET (220-350) 

21? REM MARKET PRICES (220-221) 

220 G0SUB 7T0: 

G0SUB 1340: 

VTAB 11: 

INVERSE: 

HTAB fl: 

PRINT " n iL$(L)^" MARKET PRICES ": 

NORMAL: 

PRINT A$: 

FOR I = 0 TO 4 STEP 2: 

VTAB 13+1/2: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT G$(I)=,: 

HTAB 10: 

PRINT GP(I) i: 

HTAB 21: 

PRINT G$(I + 1)=, 

221 HTAB 30: 

PRINT GP(I + 1): 

NEXT I 

What have we done here? First, we called the Events subroutine which 
starts at 790. The Events subroutine is used to present a variety of hap¬ 
penings and opportunities which may come up from time to time. Since 
we will discuss the Events subroutine in a later chapter, let's for the 



44 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


moment assume that we've already RETURNed from there. After the 
GOSUB, line 220 displays the thick bright bar, A$, then name of the port, 
followed on the same line by the words, "MARKET PRICES". 

A loop is then started, with the variable "I" being incremented from 0 
to 5. Within the loop, we print two item names and their formatted prices 
on each of three lines. (Note the fancy footwork with HTAB and VTAB 
values. These allow us to keep things neat on the screen.) 

Line 230 of our Market routine is simple: 

EES REM MARKET MENU 

S3D PRINT: 

VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT " B)UVi S) ELL n DEAVE-, OR R) ETIRE?" 

Here we have our Market Menu. We emphasize the first letters of each 
choice, because the player will choose by pressing the appropriate letter. 

Lines 240 to 244 are the Market Menu Input routine, and actually han¬ 
dle the player's choices. 


E3S REM MARKET MENU INPUT (E40-E44) 

S4D GOSUB b0: 

IF X$ = "B" THEN T$ = "BUY": 

X = 1 

E41 IF X$ = "S" THEN T$ = "SELL": 

X = E 

E4E IF X$ = "L" THEN 3b0 

S43 IF X* = "R" THEN 1300 



To Market, To Market .... CHAPTER SIX 45 


244 IF X* <> "B" AND X* <> "S" AND X* <> "L" AND X* <> 
"R" THEN GOSUB 77Q: 

GOTO 240 


Since line 240 needs our Get String subroutine at 60 to work, let's 
examine that, too: 

55 REN GET* SUBROUTINE (b0-b4) 
tD POKE - lb3ba-.0 

bl IF PEEK ( - Ib3fl4) < lEfi THEN bl 
fe.2 X* = CHR* ( PEEK ( - 1U3A4) - ISA) 

L3 POKE - lt>3tai□ 
fc.4 RETURN 


A reasonable person might ask why we need the Get String subroutine 
to handle simple input, rather than just using an INPUT statement. The 
main reason we're using this subroutine is that we are thus able to 
"screen out" undesired input. 

The most common form of undesired input is the accidental input of 
options. Sometimes even veteran players will become inattentive and 
will press a key which is incorrect. (One possibility is that the player 
will make an option choice which is legitimate only as an option in 
another menu.) 

The Market Menu Input routine takes the player's input and checks it 
for legitimacy. If the input is not proper, the program routes to a subrou¬ 
tine at line 770, where a short beep is sounded to make the player aware 
of the error. 



46 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Here's the Input Error subroutine, line 770: 

7bS REM INPUT ERROR SUBROUTINE (770) 

770 PRINT "aG" 1 -,: 

RETURN 

[Note: "aG" is the "beep" character. It is typed by first pressing the 
"control" key, then pressing the "G" while the "control" is still down. 
Don't expect it to look like "aG" on your screen listing or program print¬ 
out, however!] 

On the other hand, if the input is legitimate, in other words, one of the 
letters indicted as options in the Market Menu (B, S, L or R), the routine 
then processes the input and routes the program's flow in order to make 
the right things happen in response. 

Now let's go into the Market Menu Input routine and the Get String 
subroutine in detail. 

Line 240 immediately GOSUBs to the Get String subroutine at 60. Our 
Get String subroutine is one of our most-used routines in Taipan. First, 
line 60 empties the contents of the keyboard buffer (POKE -16386). This 
clears any keystrokes from your Apple II, and ensures that any previous 
keyboard input isn't confused with new input. (The Get String subrou¬ 
tine will look at the last character typed.) Next, in line 61, the statement 
"IF PEEK (-16384,) < 128 THEN 61" is run. This causes the program to 
loop back to the beginning of the same line unless a key is pressed on the 
keyboard. Then line 62 sets the contents of X$ to equal the character in 
the keyboard buffer: "X$ = CHR$ ( PEEK (-16384)-128)". This makes 
the contents of X$ equal to whatever key on the keyboard has been 
pressed last. 

The Get String subroutine checks to see if any keys have actually been 
pressed. If not, line 61 is restarted at its beginning. But if a key has been 
pressed, we RETURN to line 240, with X$ holding the character corres¬ 
ponding to the key which the player pressed. 

Now lines 240 to 244 have to examine the contents of X$, and make 
something happen. Here's how: 

If X$ holds the letter "B" (for Buy), then line 240 puts the word, "BUY" 
into T$, and sets the numerical variable, X, to a value of 1. 



To Market, To Market . . CHAPTER SIX 47 


(We're using X in this routine as a so-called "flag". A variable is consid¬ 
ered a flag when it is used later in a program to indicate something which 
happened previously. Here, "X = l" means "buy". We don't want to use 
X$ as a flag, because we'll soon use it to hold other characters.) 

But if X$ doesn't hold a "B", line 241 continues to check what it might 
hold. If X$ contains an "S" (for Sell), then T$ is loaded with the word, 
"SELL", and the "X" flag is set to 2. 

But that might not be the case, either — after all, there are lots of keys 
on a keyboard! So line 242 keeps checking. If the contents of X$ is the let¬ 
ter "L" (for Leave), the program jumps to line 360, where the Other 
Options routine is located. (We'll get to that routine, also, in a later chap¬ 
ter — trust us.) 

If we pressed a key other than B, S or L, line 243 checks to see if the key 
we pushed is an R (for Retire). If so, the program flow jumps to the That's 
All Folks routine at line 1300. 

But what if we had pressed none of the keys covered by this routine 
(neither the B, S, L or the R key)? In that case, line 244 has the computer 
GOSUB to line 770, the Input Error subroutine, where a short routine 
plays that beep tone we mentioned earlier. Then the computer starts out 
at the beginning of line 240 all over again, hoping upon hope that the 
next key pressed will make sense to it. 

In only two cases, the program will simply drop through to line 250, 
the start of the Buy/Sell routine. That will, naturally, happen only if a B or 
an S is pressed. 

The Buy/Sell routine allows items to be bought and sold. (What else 
did you expect?) It handles choices of trade goods, handles the input of 
the amounts to be bought or sold, checks whether the player has suffi¬ 
cient cash when buying, or sufficient numbers of goods to be sold. The 
Buy/Sell routine checks for almost any kind of error in input, and pre¬ 
vents certain kins of "cheating" by the player. It uses a special number 
input subroutine which resists scrolling and allows the player to buy 
"all" he or she can afford of an item by simply pressing the letter "A", or 
sell "all" by pressing the same key. After each transaction, the Main Dis¬ 
play subroutine is run in order to update the amounts of trade goods 
held by the player, and the player's cash on hand. Also after every pur¬ 
chase or sale, the player is returned to the Market Menu and Market 
Menu Input routines. The Buy/Sell routine is designed to be compact. To 
use as little memory as possible, it makes multiple use of as many lines as 



48 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


possible. There are lines, for instance, which handle either the buying or 
the selling of any of the six items of trade, while other lines handle other 
buying or selling functions. 

This is the start of the Buy/Sell routine: 

245 REM BUY/SELL (25U-351) 

2M7 REH ITEM MENU (250) 

250 VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB Ifi: 

HTAB 3: 

PRINT T$=," "^TCSi"?": 

GOSUB 2b0: 

GOTO 2fl0 


If you recall (and even if you don't), A$ is a line of 40 spaces. We print it 
at position VTAB 18 on the screen, in order to clear what we had there 
before, the Market Menu. Next, using HTAB 2 to move over two 
columns, we print T$, which we've just made to contain either the word 
"BUY" or the word "SELL". After T$, we display a space, followed by 
TC$, then a question mark. We previously put the first letters of each of 
our trade items into TC$, back in line 10 during initialization. So what we 
get on the screen is either . . . 

BUY 0-. S-. Ti A-. P OR Rf 


or . . . 


SELL 0-, Si T-, Ai P OR Rf 


Since we don't have nearly enough room to spell this prompt out in 
whole words, like "SELL OPIUM, SILK, TEA, ARMS, PEPPER OR 
RICE?", and those words are written right above in the Market Prices, the 
letters will suffice. 


To Market, To Market .... CHAPTER SIX 49 


Just as we did in the Market Menu Input routine, we now have to take, 
and process, the player's input. So lines 260 through 270 will be our Item 
Choice subroutine. Since we'll have other places in the program where a 
choice of items will be needed, we want to make this a subroutine, rather 
than having similar lines scattered throughout the program. For the same 
reason, it's also useful to make the Item Choice subroutine as general¬ 
ized, and therefore as flexible, as possible. (It often seems that the reali¬ 
ties of memory-conscious programming conspire against "elegant", 
top-down programming.) 

Here is our Item Choice subroutine: 


ESS 

REN 

iteh 

CHOICE 

SUBROUTINE 

(Sb0-E70) 

EbO 

GOSUB 

b0: 






IF X$ 

= "0" 

THEN 

XI 

= □ 


Ebl 

IF X$ 

= "S" 

THEN 

XI 

= 1 


SbE 

IF X$ 

= "A" 

THEN 

XI 

= 3 


Eb3 

IF X$ 

= ft p n 

THEN 

XI 

= 4 


EbS 

IF X$ 

= "R" 

THEN 

XI 

= S 


Ebb 

IF X$ 

<> "0" 

AND 

X$ 

<> "S" AND 

X$ <> "T" 


"A" AND X$ <> "P" AND X$ <> "R" THEN GOSUB 770: 
GOTO EbO 

E70 RETURN 


Our Item Choice subroutine first GOSUBs to the Get String Subrou¬ 
tine at 60, and gets an input from the keyboard, just like in our Market 
Menu Input routine at 240. It then sets the variable XI as a flag to identify 
the chosen item. If an invalid key is pressed, the program GOSUBs line 
770, the Input Error subroutine, to signal the player to "watch it, buster!" 
Much like lines 240 through 244, isn't it? 



50 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Here's a review of the lines we've used in this chapte: 


55 

REM GET$ SUBROUTINE (L0-L4) 


LO 

POKE - 1L3LA -iO 


LI 

IF PEEK ( - 1L3A4) < lEfl THEN 

LI 

LE 

X$ = CHR$ ( PEEK ( - 1L3S4) - 

lEfl) 

L3 

POKE - lt>3Ld 10 


L4 

RETURN 


115 

REM MAIN DISPLAY (1E0-150) 


iao 

GOSUB 130: 



GOTO ESO 

130 VTAB 1: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT "PORT n ’iL*(L)i: 

HTAB Efl: 

PRINT "iDA + 1 i" t" iY 

140 VTAB E: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "CASH "*i: 
a = C: 

GOSUB 1330: 

NORMAL: 

VTAB E: 

HTAB Efl: 

PRINT "GUNS "nG: 


To Market, To Market . . CHAPTER SIX 51 


VTAB 3: 

PRINT "DEBT "=,: 
a = D: 

GOSUB 1330: 

VTAB 3: 

HTAB 26: 

PRINT "HOLD "i: 
a = SH: 

GOSUB 1330 

141 VTAB 4: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "GOODS ABOARD SHIP HONGKONG GODOtiJN": 
NORMAL 

ISO FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

VTAB S + I: 

PRINT G$(I): 

VTAB S + I: 

HTAB 11: 

PRINT CHR$ (133):,: 
a = SG(I): 

GOSUB 1330: 

VTAB S + I: 

HTAB BL>: 

PRINT CHR$ (133):,: 
a = GG(I): 

GOSUB 1330: 

NEXT I: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

RETURN 



52 TAIPA N : A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


E1E 

REM 

MARKET 

(EEQ-3SQ) 

E17 

REM 

MARKET 

PRICES (EED-EE1) 

BED 

GOSUB 

710: 



GOSUB 134Q: 

VTAB 11: 

INVERSE: 

HTAB fi: 

PRINT " MARKET PRICES 

NORMAL: 

PRINT A$: 

FOR I = D TO 4 STEP E: 

VTAB 13 + I / E: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT G$(I)i: 

HTAB IQ: 

PRINT GP(I) i: 

HTAB El: 

PRINT G*(I + Di 

ESI HTAB 30: 

PRINT GP(I + 1) : 

NEXT I 

EES REM MARKET MENU (E3D-E44) 

E30 PRINT: 

VTAB lfi: 

PRINT " B)UY-, S) ELL n L)EAVE-> OR R) ETIREf" 


E3S REM MARKET MENU INPUT (E4Q-E44) 


To Market, To Market . . CHAPTER SIX 53 


240 GOSUB fc.0: 

IF X$ = "B" THEN T$ = "BUY": 

X = 1 

241 IF X$ = "S" THEN T$ = "SELL": 

X = 2 

242 IF X$ = "L" THEN 3U0 

243 IF X$ = "R" THEN 1300 

244 IF X$ <> "B" AND X$ <> "S" AND X$ <> "L" AND X$ 
<> "R" THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 240 

247 REfl ITEM NENU (250) 

250 VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT A$ ^: 

VTAB Ifl: 

HTAB 3: 

PRINT T$i" "iTCS^"?": 

GOSUB 2U0: 

GOTO 260 

255 REN. ITEN CHOICE SUBROUTINE (2U0-270) 

2L>0 GOSUB UO: 

IF X$ = "0" THEN XI = 0 

2bl IF X$ = "S" THEN XI = 1 



54 TAI PA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


EbE IF X$ = "A" THEN XI = 3 

Eb3 IF X$ = "P" THEN XI = 4 

Eb5 IF X$ = "R" THEN XI = 5 

Ebb IF X$ <> "0" AND X$ <> "S" AND X$ <> n T" AND X$ 

<>"A n AND X$ <> "P" AND X$ <> "R° THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO SbO 
E70 RETURN 

7bS REN INPUT ERROR SUBROUTINE (770) 

770 PRINT "*G"t: 

RETURN 

[Note: "aG" is the "beep" character. It is typed by first pressing the 
"control" key, then pressing the "G" while the "control" is still down. 
Don't expect it to look like "aG" on your screen listing or program print¬ 
out, however!] 

13ES REN BIG NUNBER SUBROUTINE (1330-1370) 

1330 IF ABS ((3) < lEb THEN PRINT INT 
NORNAL: 

PRINT n 
RETURN 

1331 IF ABS ((2) < 1ET THEN (2 = <3 / lEb: 

,3$ = "MIL": 


GOTO 1335 


To Market, To Market. . CHAPTER SIX 55 


1332 IF ABS ( <3 ) < IE 12 THEN Cl = <2 / 1E5: 

C3$ = "BIL": 

GOTO 1335 

1333 IF ABS 02) > = 1E12 THEN Q = (2 / 1E12: 
(2$ = "TRL": 

GOTO 1335 

1335 PRINT INT (<3)M2$i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " 

1337 RETURN 

1340 FOR I = 12 TO Ifi 

1345 HTAB 1 

1350 VTAB I: 

PRINT A$i 

13U0 NEXT I 

13U5 PRINT: 

VTAB 12 

1370 RETURN 


So, to sum up what we've done in this chapter: 

Line 120 sent the program to the Main Display subroutine, starting at 
130. The Main Display subroutine (lines 130 to 150) displays a whole mess 



56 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


of important information on the screen, like where we are, what we've 
got with us, what day it is, etc. 

After RETURNing from the Main Display subroutine, line 120 sends us 
to the Market routine starting at line 220. The first portion of the Market 
routine is the Market Price routine, which first GOSUBs to the Events 
subroutine at 790, then displays how much each item costs. Continuing 
the Market routine, line 230 is our market Menu routine, displaying 
options. Lines 240 to 244 are the Market Menu Input routine. They han¬ 
dle the player's choices, working with the Get String subroutine at line 
60, and the Input Error subroutine at line 770. With correct input, the 
program then goes to the lines covered in the next chapter, which are at 
the heart of our game, lines which handle the trading process itself. 








Canton-Commissioner Lin burns opium 


>■ 

■■ Mk 






T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Cash on the Barrelhead 

CHAPTER SEVEN 


At the end of the last chapter we either told the computer that we wanted 
to buy, or that we wished to sell. We also chose the item we wished to 
deal with. The Market routine continued after the Item Choice subrou¬ 
tine (lines 260 through 270) RETURNed program flow to the end of line 
250 (the first line of the Buy/Sell routine). Line 250 finally sent us away 
with GOTO 280. 

Here's line 280: 

2fl0 IF X=1 AND GP(X1) > C THEN VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT "YOU CAN’T AFFORD ANY "G$(XD". 

G0SUB 7b0: 

GOTO 230 


Line 280 first checks to see if two things are true: that we're both try¬ 
ing to buy an item and that we don't have enough cash to buy a single 
unit of that item. If both of these things are true, we are told that we can't 
afford any of this item, we GOSUB 760 to play a note to underscore our 
error, and we RETURN to our Market Menu at 230. 


59 



60 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Thus line 280 only operates if we're trying to buy something we can't 
afford. 

If you were to walk into a real estate office, a smiling agent might ask 
whether you wanted to buy or sell property. 

You might reply: "I'd like to buy some real estate, I do believe, if it is 
not too much trouble." 

"No trouble at all. I live to serve," says the agent, wringing his/her 
hands in anticipation of commission points. The agent gestures at 
shoeboxes full of real estate deeds. (Each is marked with a single initial 
letter.) 

The agent says, "We handle the finest in Shanties, Cabins, Bungalows, 
Houses, Mansions and Palaces. In which category are you interested?" 

You answer: "Uh, I think your 'Palace' category would suit me fine 
today, thank you so very much, please." 

Now, at this point it is an exceedingly remote possibility that the real 
estate agent would just grab a boxful of deeds marked with a P , and 
ask, "And exactly how many Palaces would you like?" 

It's much more likely that the agent will attempt to "qualify" you. In 
other words, the agent will question you in depth, trying to determine 
whether you can afford even a single Palace. 

That's what line 280 does. It "qualifies" the player for the purchase. 

Line 290 does a similar check: 

210 IF X = 2 AND SG(X1) < 1 THEN VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT "YOU HAVE NO "G$(Xl) n ABOARD! 

G0SUB 7t0: 

GOTO 230 


All line 290 does is to check whether you're trying to sell something 
you don't have. (Keep that deed for the Brooklyn Bridge in your pocket!) 

Line 760, the No-Can-Do subroutine, both plays a note and calls the 
Delay subroutine, starting at line 780. Here's both of those subroutines: 




Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 61 


755 REN NO CAN DO SUBROUTINE (7b0) 

7b0 PRINT "aG": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

RETURN 

[Note the "aG" in line 760. Remember, it is typed in by first pressing the 
Control key, then pressing the "G" key while the Control is still pressed.] 


775 

REN DELAY SUBROUTINE 

(7A0-7A3) 

7 A0 

POKE - 

ltiBla A 1 □ 


7A1 

FOR I = 

0 TO 250 


7 A2 

IF PEEK 

POKE - 

RETURN 

( - 1L3A4) > 

lb3tiA t 0: 

127 THEN 

7 A3 

NEXT I: 

RETURN 




Actually, line 760 (our No-Can-Do subroutine) is much like the Input 
Error subroutine we already introduced, line 770. The difference is that in 
line 760, we also use the Delay subroutine at lines 780 to 783. 

The Delay subroutine is a handy and "user-friendly" little scrap of pro¬ 
gramming. It's used to purposely slow down the computer whenever we 
are giving the player a brief message. It gives the player plenty of time to 
read the message. But since some folks read faster than others, the Delay 
subroutine gives the player the option of simply pressing the spacebar of 
the computer in order to end the-message. This can considerably speed 
play, especially when the player becomes familiar with some of the more 
common brief messages. Notice that a "FOR...TO...NEXT" loop is used 
just to eat up time, while constantly checking to see if the spacebar is 
pressed. If either the variable I becomes incremented to 250 or the space¬ 
bar is pressed, the subroutine RETURNS. 



62 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


The way that the program detects the spacebar is with PEEK and 
POKE statements. A full explanation would be very technical, but the 
nitty gritty is that these statements clear out the keyboard buffer, then 
look for input. When the spacebar is pressed, line 782 RETURNS us from 
the subroutine, even if the alloted time hasn't run out. 

With lines 280 and 290 we screened out both too-poor buyers and 
empty-handed sellers. Now that we've banished the riff-raff, we can 
really start doing business with our next line, 300: 

300 VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT T$=," HOW MUCH "AGSCXDi: 

PRINT "? 

NUN* = 

NUH = 0: 

G0SUB 310: 

GOTO 3E0 


You'll recall that we put either "BUY" or "SELL" into T$ back in lines 
240 through 244, our Market Menu Input routine, and that XI is used as a 
flag to indicate the type of item we're dealing with. Thus, line 300 can ask 
any of twelve questions. It can ask the player how much of any one of six 
items should be either bought or sold. 

Next, the line makes sure that the string variable, NUM$, is empty. 
This is important, because we'll be using NUM$ to collect keyboard input 
in a moment. Likewise, the numerical variable, NUM, is set to zero. 

Line 300 then GOSUBs to 310, where we start perhaps the trickiest rou¬ 
tine in the game, the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper subroutine: 

305 REI1 SOOPER DOOPER NUNBER SCOOPER SUBROUTINE 
(310-314) 


310 PRINT CHR* (fl)i: 



Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 63 


INVERSE: 

PRINT " 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB bO: 

IF LEN (NUMS) > 0 AND ASC (X$) = A THEN PRINT XS=,: 
PRINT" 

PRINT X$nX^: 

PRINT" 

FG = 1: 

IF LEN (NUMS) = 1 THEN NUMS = "": 

FG = D: 

GOTO 310 

311 IF FG = 1 THEN NUMS = LEFTS (NUPIS-. LEN (NUMS) - 
1) : 

FG = 0: 

GOTO 310 

312 IF ASC (X$) = b5 OR ASC (X$) = 13 THEN RETURN 

313 IF ASC <X$) < 4 A OR ASC (XS) > 57 THEN 310 

314 NUMS = NUMS + X$: 

PRINT CHRS (A)^XSi: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " "*: 

NORMAL: 

GOTO 310 


Looks nasty, huh? Actually, it's fairly simple. Like filling out tax return 
forms is "simple", that is . . . But however complex it might seem, it sim¬ 
plifies input for the player. If the Delay subroutine was "user-friendly", 
the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper is downright fresh! 



64 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Let's first explain what it is we want this subroutine to do: 

We need a routine which will allow us to enter numbers into the com¬ 
puter. We'd like to be able to have a special key, the letter A, which will 
allow us either to buy all of an item which we can afford, or to sell all of 
an item which we have aboard ship. 

Further, we'd like to filter out any accidental input of non-numeric 
keys (except "A"), and especially to prevent the players from putting a 
minus sign in front of their numbers. (This could be a form of "cheating . 
A player could "buy" a negative amount of a item, thus actually getting 
cash and making the player's ship lighter !) 

Other things it'd be nice to do are to have the numbers input by the 
player print on the screen, and to allow the player to "back up using the 
"back-arrow" key to correct mistakes. Let's also throw in a cursor, since 
folks expect to see one of those things. Finally, we'd like to get out of the 
Sooper Dooper Number Scooper subroutine either by pressing 
"RETURN", or by using the "A" key. 

We've crammed features for handling all of this wild and crazy stuff 
into this routine. 

Yes, it was hard to write — but not nearly as difficult as explaining it. 
Here's our attempt: 

First, we have PRINT CHR$ (8). CHR$ (8) is the "backspace" character. 
So, wherever we've positioned the invisible cursor prior to using this 
subroutine for number input, it's moved back one space. A bright block 
(an INVERSE space: '■') is then displayed as a visible "artificial" cursor. 
Notice that we leave a semicolon (;) after the cursor, so the computer will 
print its next character on the same line, just after the cursor, rather than 
on the next line. (The computer can be made not to display its own cur¬ 
sor, but it always has at least an invisible cursor it keeps track of, so it 
knows where to PRINT next.) After displaying the INVERSE-space cur¬ 
sor, we NORMALize the display. 

The next thing line 310 does is to GOSUB line 60. That is our Get String 
subroutine, which we earlier explained. It's enough for now to remember 
that line 60 puts characters from the keyboard into X$. 

When a key is pressed, the Get String Subroutine RETURNS us to line 
310. Now we have the statements: IF LEN (NUM$) > 0 AND ASC 
(X$) = 8 THEN PRINT X$;: PRINT " PRINT X$;X$;:. This part of the 
Sooper Dooper Number Scooper subroutine allows the player to back- 




Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 65 


space the cursor to delete any number that might have been typed by 
mistake. It first checks that NUM$ (which holds the accumulated charac¬ 
ters from the keyboard in string, rather than numerical form), has a 
LENgth greater than zero — that it has something in it, in other words. 
This check is done because otherwise we might backspace too far to the 
left. Since this portion of the line will operate only if numbers are already 
displayed and a back-arrow is pressed, X$ would at this point naturally 
contain a back-arrow, or backspace, character. We have to print a space 
character (" ") next, to delete our "artificial” cursor. We then have to 
backspace twice more (PRINT X$;X$;), in order to put our "artificial cur¬ 
sor" just to the left of the digit we want to erase in the first place. Next, 
we have to print another space, to actually delete that digit. 

Okay. So we've been able to delete an unwanted digit from the screen. 
But we've still got to get it out of the computer's memory. We then set a 
flag variable to a value of one (FG = 1). (We use this flag to remind the 
program that we're shortening the length of NUM$.) The next statement 
is: IF LEN (NUM$) = 1 THEN NUM$= "". That statement simply says 
that if the length of the string, "NUM$" is one character, then we'll make 
it zerq characters long. So now what we see is really what we get. Next, 
we reset the flag, FG, to zero, it having served its purpose. And finally, 
having corrected the last mis-typed digit, we GOTO the top of line 310, so 
we can begin typing in new characters. 

Line 311 works much like the last three statements in line 310, except it 
operates in a situation where there is already more than one digit con¬ 
tained in NUM$. NUM$ will have its right-most character cut off. In 
other words, the last character entered will be nipped out of NUM$. 

Got that? If so, please explain it to us. (Just kidding, folks!) 

If we haven't pressed the back-arrow, the next part of the Sooper 
Dooper Number Scooper subroutine, line 312, checks to see if we've 
pressed either the "A" (character 65) or the "RETURN" key (character 13). 
This statement is the only way out of the subroutine. If either of these 
keys were pressed, program flow RETURNS from the subroutine to 
where it came from - in this case, line 300. (Afterward, as we'll soon 
show, line 300 sends us to routines starting at 330, where either the num¬ 
bers held in string form in NUM$, or that "A" get processed further.) 

If we've pressed neither "back-arrow," "A," nor "RETURN," the next 
part of the routine, line 313, screens the input to make certain that we've 
at least pressed one of the number keys: "IF ASC (X$) < 48 OR ASC (X$) 
> 57 THEN 310". Since the ASCII value of the characters for the num- 



66 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


bers zero through nine run from 48 to 57, this line simply routes us back 
to square one, restarting the line at the top, if any non-numeric keys 
(other than "back-arrow", "A" or "RETURN", which were already taken 
care of) were pressed. 

Now, in line 314, we see how NUM$ gets those number characters into 
it: "NUM$ = NUM$ + X$". This adds the last number character from the 
keyboard (X$) to the right end of the string contained in NUM$. Since 
this is the only way anything can get into NUM$, NUM$ will only hold 
number characters. 

After that, we have "PRINT CHR$ (8);X$;'\ This uses the backspace 
character (8) to erase the existing "artificial" cursor, then prints X$, which 
will display a numerical digit in the old cursor's place. Then we have 
another INVERSE space to serve as a cursor, and NORMAL to make 
screen printing, well . . . normal. 

Finally, we have a "GOTO 310", which takes us to the top of line 310, so 
the player can add more digits to the number or finish by pressing 
"RETURN". 

That's the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper. 

Let's assume the player has pressed either "A" or "RETURN", and 
we're back at line 300. 

Following the "GOSUB 310" in line 300, is "GOTO 320". Lines 320 
through 335 continue with gathering the quantity to be bought or sold. 
Let's look at 'em: 

320 IF X = 1 THEN IF X$ = "A" THEN PRINT CHR$ (fl)*,: 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL"i: 

NUN = INT (C / GP(XD) 

321 IF X = 1 AND X$ <> "A" THEN NUM = VAL (NUM$) 

330 IF X = 2 THEN IF X* = "A" THEN PRINT CHR* <fi)i: 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL"i: 

NUN = SG(X1) 



Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 67 


331 IF X = 2 AND X$ <> "A" THEN NUN = VAL (NUN$) 
335 NORMAL 


Line 320 through 335 convert the output of the Sooper Dooper Num¬ 
ber Scooper subroutine into quantities of goods to be bought. The first 
part of line 320 checks if we are buying (X = 1), and whether the last key 
we pressed is an "A". If both these things are true, it backspaces the 
invisible cursor, then briefly prints the word "ALL" in inverse video. The 
last portion of line 320, "NUM = INT (C / GP(X1))", sets the value of the 
numerical variable NUM to equal the largest affordable whole number of 
the item the player wishes to buy. It does this by dividing the player's 
cash by the unit price of the chosen item and then using the INT function 
to round off the result to a whole number. (Throughout Taipan, we'll 
force the computer to nearly always output quantities as whole numbers, 
and to always accept only whole numbers as inputs. This neatens the 
screen, simplifies play, and does nothing to hurt "realism".) 

Line 321, "IF X = 1 AND X$ < > "A" THEN NUM = VAL (NUM$)", 
operates when we are buying and we have not pressed the "A" key. It 
converts the string contents of NUM$ into a quantity to be stored in 
numerical variable NUM. 

A similar process goes on in lines 330 and 331, but only if we're selling 
cargo items. The first part of line 330 works just like the beginning of line 
320, so we'll skip over that. The last part, which operates if the player has 
pressed "A", is "NUM = SG (XI)". This puts a number equal to all of our 
shipboard quantity of the chosen item into the variable NUM. 

Line 331 operates if we're selling, and have input numbers (instead of 
pressing "A") via the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper. This works just 
like a line 321, converting numbers in the string NUM$ to the variable, 
NUM. Finally, we use NORMAL to stop displaying in INVERSE mode. 

This ends our Transaction Quantity routine. 

After lines 320 through 330, we now have the quantity of goods to be 
bought or sold, stored in NUM. Lines 340 to 341, and 350 to 351 of our 
Market routine respectively finish the transaction of buying or selling 
items. Here are those last four lines of the Market routine: 



68 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


3M0 IF X = 1 THEN IF NUU * GP(X1) > C THEN PRINT: 
VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT "YOU CAN'T AFFORD SO riUCH! "i: 

GOSUB 7b0: 

VTAB 16: 

PRINT A$i: 

GOTO 3DD. 

341 IF X = 1 AND NUU * GP(X1) < = C 
THEN SG(X1) = SG(X1) + NUU: 

SH = SH - NUN: 

C = C - GP(X1) * NUM: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 230 

350 IF NUN > SG(X1) THEN VTAB 16: 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB 16: 

PRINT "YOU DON’T HAVE THAT NUCH! "i: 

GOSUB 7b0: 

VTAB 16: 

PRINT A$i: 

GOTO 300 

351 SG(X1) = SG(X1) - NUN: 

SH = SH + NUN: 

C = C + (NUN * GP(X1)): 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 230 


Line 340 first makes certain we're buying. If we're selling cargo, the 
rest of the line is skipped. (A similar check would prevent line 341 from 
operating.) It then checks if we're ordering more than we can pay for. If 



Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 69 


we can't afford the quantity we've input, it tells us we can't afford that 
amount, GOSUBs to the No-Can-Do subroutine at 760, clears the mes¬ 
sage it's just given us using A$ (a line of 31 spaces), and goes back to line 
300 to ask us once again how much we want to buy. 

But if we're buying and can afford the quantity we've asked for, line 
341 comes into play. The shipboard amount of that item, SG(X1), is 
increased by the quantity in the variable NUM. The available cargo space 
aboard ship (SH) is decreased by NUM, and the player's cash (C) is low¬ 
ered by the price of the chosen item, multiplied by the amount the player 
requested. Line 341 then GOSUBs 130 to update the Main Display to 
show how much cargo and money we now have, and finally goes back to 
the Market Menu and the reset of the Market Option routine, with 
GOTO 230. 

Lines 350 and 351 are the flip side of the proposition, and handle sell¬ 
ing in about the same way that 340 and 341 handled buying. 

Since if we were buying, the program flow wouldn't have gotten this 
far, we don't have to check to make sure we're trying to sell. To get to line 
340, we'd have to be selling something. Line 350 therefore first checks to 
see if we're trying to sell more of an item than we have aboard ship. If we 
are, it tells us we don't have that much, GOSUBs to the No-Can-Do sub¬ 
routine, removes its message, then puts us back at line 300, where it can 
again ask us how much is to be sold. 

If the player does have at least as much cargo as has been input, NUM 
is subtracted by line 351 from the amount of that item aboard ship, the 
ship's available capacity is increased accordingly, the player's cash is 
increased by the unit price of the item multiplied by the number sold, 
and the Main Display is updated. Control is returned to the Market 
Options routine starting at 230. 

That, Dear Reader, is curtains for the Market routine, may it rest in 
peace. It took us two chapters, but we are finally finished. 

Here's a recap of the lines we've used in this chapter: 

EflO IF X=1 AND GP(Xl) > C THEN VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT "YOU CAN’T AFFORD ANY "G$(XD". : 

G0SUB 7bD: 

GOTO E30 



70 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


ETO IF X = 2 AND SG(X1) < 1 THEN VTAB Ifi: 
PRINT "YOU HAVE NO n G$(XD" ABOARD! 
GOSUB 7b0: 

GOTO E30 


3DD VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT A$^: 

VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT T$i" HOU MUCH n iG$(Xl)i: 

PRINT "f : 

NUM$ = 

NUM = □: 

GOSUB 310: 

GOTO 3E0 

305 REM SOOPER DOOPER NUMBER SCOOPER SUBROUTINE 
(310-314) 


310 PRINT CHR$ (fl>*: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " "i : 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB LO: 

IF LEN (NUM$) > 0 AND ASC (X*) = fl THEN PRINT X$i: 
PRINT" "i : 

PRINT X$iX$i: 

PRINT" "^: 

FG=1: 

IF LEN (NUM$) = 1 THEN NUM$ = "": 

FG = 0: 

GOTO 310 





Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 71 


311 IF FG = 1 THEN NUM$ = LEFT$ (NUMS-. LEN (NUM$) - 
1) : 

FG = 0: 

GOTO 310 

313 IF ASC (X$) = bS OR ASC (X$) = 13 THEN RETURN 

313 IF ASC (X$) < 4A OR ASC (X$) > 57 THEN 310 

314 NUM$ = NUM$ + X$: 

PRINT CHR$ (A)iX$‘, : 

INVERSE: 

PRINT n 
NORMAL: 

GOTO 310 

330 IF X = 1 THEN IF X$ = "A" THEN PRINT CHR$ (A) i: 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL"i : 

NUM = INT (C / GP(XD) 

331 IF X = 1 AND X$ <> "A" THEN NUM = VAL (NUM$) 

330 IF X = 3 THEN IF X$ = "A" THEN PRINT CHR$ (A) i : 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL" =i : 

NUM = SG(X1) 

331 IF X = 3 AND X$ <> "A" THEN NUM = VAL (NUM$) 

335 NORMAL 



72 


TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


340 IF X = 1 THEN IF NUN * GP(X1) > C THEN PRINT 
VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT "YOU CAN'T AFFORD SO MUCH! "i: 

GOSUB 7b0: 

VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT A*:.: 

GOTO 300 

341 IF X = 1 AND NUM * GP(X1) < = C 
THEN SG(X1) = SG(X1) + NUN: 

SH = SH - NUN: 

C = C - GP(X1) * NUN: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO E30 

350 IF NUN > SG(X1) THEN VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT "YOU DON'T HAVE THAT NUCH! 

GOSUB 7b0: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT A$ : 

GOTO 300 

351 SG(Xl) = SG(X1) - NUN: 

SH = SH + NUN: 

C = C + (NUN * GP(X1) ) : 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 230 

755 REN NO CAN DO SUBROUTINE <7L0) 



Cash on the Barrelhead: CHAPTER SEVEN 73 


7b0 PRINT "aG": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

RETURN 

[Note the "aG" in line 760. Remember, it is typed in by first pressing the 
Control key, then pressing the "G" key while the Control is still pressed.] 


775 

REN DELAY SUBROUTINE 

(760-763) 

760 

POKE - 

1L3L6-.0 


761 

FOR I = 

0 TO 350 


76E 

IF PEEK 

POKE - 

RETURN 

( - lt>364) > 

Ib3b6i0: 

1S7 THEN 

763 

NEXT I: 

RETURN 




Here, in general, is what the lines in this chapter do: 

Lines 280 and 290 "qualify" the player for buying or selling a chosen 
item. The No-Can-Do subroutine at 760 (and, through it, the Delay sub¬ 
routine, 780) is called by these lines if the player tries to buy (280) an item 
costing more per unit than the player's total cash, or sell (290) an item the 
player doesn't have. Both lines route back to the Market Option routine 
at 230 in these situations. 

Line 300 asks the player how much of an item is to be bought or sold, 
and GOSUBs 310 to the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper to allow the 
input of the amount. 

Lines 310 to 314 themselves GOSUB, to 60 (the Get String Subroutine). 
They either collect numbers input from the keyboard, in which case 



74 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


they RETURN to 300 after "RETURN" is pressed, or else take the letter 
"A" (for "all") as an input, and RETURN with that. Also, these lines 
screen out all but legitimate characters, and put an artificial cursor on the 
screen. 

When the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper is finished, line 300 then 
GOTOs line 320, which, with line 321, handles buying. These lines proc¬ 
ess the "A" into an amount to be held in variable "NUM" if the "A" key 
was pressed, or, if a number was input, process the string (NUM$), hold¬ 
ing the digits of the number, into "NUM". 

Lines 330 and 331 do the same thing for selling which 320 and 321 did 
for buying, putting a quantity into NUM. 

Lines 340 and 341 either catch a player trying to buy more than cash will 
allow, or complete the purchase transaction, update the screen, and take 
the program all the way back to the Market Menu at 230. 











T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Keeping Our Other Options Open 

CHAPTER EIGHT 


Remember the Market Menu and the Market Option routines? They 
allowed us to choose among Buying, Selling, Leaving and Retiring. We 
have seen how buying and selling work. Now we'll look at what happens 
when the player chooses "L" for "Leave". 

We get to the Other Options routine when "IF X$ = "L" THEN 360" 
operates in line 242. Here is the start of the Other Options routine: 

355 REM OTHER OPTIONS <3tO-3Al) 

3L.0 GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB 11: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " T) RADE n R) ECORDS": 


77 



78 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


IF L = 0 THEN PRINT " DENDER-, OODOtdN OR 
EMIBARK?": 

PRINT: 

PRINT A$ 

3bl IF L <> □ THEN PRINT " OR E)MBARK?": 

PRINT: 

PRINT: 

PRINT A$i 


Line 360 first GOSUBs 130 to get an update of the Main Display, then it 
uses the "Cleanup subroutine" to clear the area below the Main Display. 
Since we'll be using the Cleanup subroutine often, let's see it now: 

1336 REM CLEANUP SUBROUTINE (134Q-1370) 

1340 FOR I = IE TO 16 

1345 HTAB 1 

1350 VTAB I: 

PRINT 

13b0 NEXT I 

13b5 PRINT: 

VTAB IS 

1370 RETURN 


All the Cleanup subroutine does is to print long lines of spaces (A$), 
from VTAB 12 to VTAB 18. 

Next, lines 360 and 361 show us a menu of options. 



Keeping Our Other Options Open: CHAPTER EIGHT 79 


This menu is set up to display two different versions — in Hongkong, 
the menu will read: 

T) RADE n RiECORDS-, UENDER-, G)0D0WN OR 
E) IIBARKf 

In any port o' call other than Hongkong, the menu will read: 
TiRADE-, R) ECORDS OR EMBARK?" 

Why the different menus in different ports? That's because only in our 
home port of Hongkong will we find the Iron Lotus Triad moneylender. 
Elder Brother Wu. Only there do we maintain a godown, or warehouse. 

In lines 370 to 381 we continue the Other Options routine: 


370 

GOSUB GO: 

IF X$ = "G" 

AND 

L = 0 THEN X = 1 

371 

IF 

X$ = "T" 

THEN 

120 

372 

IF 

X$ = "R" 

THEN 

X 

II 

ru 

373 

IF 

X$ = "L" 

THEN 

X 

ii 

UJ 

374 

IF 

X$ = "E" 

THEN 

730 

375 

IF 

(X$ <> " 

G" OR 

L <> 0) AND X$ 


"R" AND X$ <> "L" AND X$ <> n E" THEN GOSUB 770: 
GOTO 370 

3A0 IF X = 3 AND L <> 0 THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 370 

3A1 IF X <> 3 OR L = 0 THEN ON X GOSUB 3^0,GOO,470: 
GOTO 3b0 



80 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Rather than always going into complete detail about programming 
concepts we've covered before, the Authors will assume the reader has 
learned (or already understood) methods used earlier. Since the above 
lines are similar in concept to the Market Menu and the Market Option 
routines, they'll require less explanation. 

Line 370 uses the Get String subroutine (60) to take the player's input. 
Then, if the player's location is Hongkong and the input is "G" (for 
Godown), the flag X is given a value of 1. 

In line 371, if the player had input a "T" (Trade), the program GOTOs 
120 to update the screen, give the Market Prices, and the Market Menu. 

Had the player input "R" (Retire), line 372 gives X the value of 2. 

Likewise in line 373, if the input is "L" (Lender) the flag X is given a 
value of 3. 

An input of "E" (Embark) causes line 374 to GOTO 730, the Embark 
routine. 

In line 375, any input but the "legal" ones (G, T, R, L or E) are caught, 
the player is given the Input Error tones, and line 370 is started again 
from the top. 

The Other Options input processing is concluded with lines 380 and 
381. First line 380 checks to give the Input Error note and restarts line 370 
if the player is outside of Hongkong but has tried to see the Lender. 

Next, line 381 GOSUBs 390 if X = 1 (Godown), GOSUBs 600 if X = 2 
(Retire), or GOSUBs 470 if X = 3 (Lender). 

Finally, after whichever subroutine was called, line 381 GOTOs line 360 
to give us the Other Options Menu again. 

In the next chapter we will visit our godown, and see how we can store 
away trade goods. 

In the meantime, here are the lines we've used in this chapter: 


355 REM OTHER OPTIONS <3fc,0-3fll) 


Keeping Our Other Options Open: CHAPTER EIGHT 81 


3b0 GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB 11: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " T) RADE i R) ECORDS" *, : 

IF L = 0 THEN PRINT ", DENDER-. G ) 0 D 0 Id N OR 
E)MBARK?": 

PRINT: 

PRINT A$ 

3L1 IF L <> 0 THEN PRINT n OR E)MBARK?": 

PRINT: 

PRINT: 

PRINT A$i 

370 GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = "G" ANI> L = 0 THEN X = 1 

371 IF X$ = "T" THEN 120 

372 IF X$ = "R" THEN X = 2 

373 IF X$ = "L" THEN X = 3 

374 IF X$ = "E" THEN 730 

375 IF (X$ <> "G" OR L <> 0) AND X$ <> "T" AND X$ <> 
"R" AND X$ <> "L" AND X$ <> "E" THEN GOSUB 770: 
GOTO 370 



82 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


3A0 IF X = 3 AND L <> Q THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 370 

3A1 IF X <> 3 OR L = 0 THEN ON X GOSUB 3H0ib00n470 
GOTO 3b0 

133A REM CLEANUP SUBROUTINE (1340-1370) 

1340 FOR I = IB TO 1A 

1345 HTAB 1 

1350 VTAB I: 

PRINT A$i 

13b0 NEXT I 

13bS PRINT: 

VTAB IB 


1370 RETURN 





Lorcha 





T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Let's All Go Down to the Godown 

CHAPTER NINE 


The Godown subroutine is made up of eight lines, from 390 to 460. Those 
lines handle the transfer of trade goods to or from the godown, and trap 
and prevent errors by the player. Let's begin with line 390: 

3AM REN GODOWN SUBROUTINE (3T0-4bl) 

3A7 REN GODOWN MENU (3T0-33E) 

3T0 GOSUB 130: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT "CARGO <T>0 OR <F>R0N GODOWN?": 

PRINT A$i: 

GOSUB b0: 

IF X$= "T" THEN 410 


85 



TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


86 

3T1 IF X$="F" THEN 440 

3T2 IF X$<> "T" AND X$ <> "F" THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 3T0 

Here we've been able to combine both a Godown Menu and the neces¬ 
sary processing of the player's input, into one line. If we choose to move 
items To the godown, the program GOTOs 410. If we want to move cargo 
From the godown, we GOTO 440. Any other input gives us the Input 
Error raspberry, and restarts line 390 to ask us again. 

Lines 410 through 430 handle moving cargo to the godown. Here's line 
410: 

410 GOSUB 400: 

IF SG(X1) = 0 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT "YOU HAVE NO "iG$(Xl)i" ABOARD! ": 

GOSUB 7U0: 

RETURN 

We'll need the Godown Cargo Choice subroutine at 400, so here's that, 
too: 

3TS REN GODOUN CARGO CHOICE SUBROUTINE (400) 

400 VTAB 13: 

PRINT "N0VE U)HAT ("TC$")f ": 

GOSUB EU0: 

RETURN 

Line 410 immediately GOSUBs 400 to get our choice of cargo to move 
to the godown. At line 400, we're asked which cargo item we want 
moved. (TC$ is printed to prompt us with the initials of the choices: "O, 
S, T, A, P OR R".) The line then GOSUBs 260, where that line and 270 
make up the same Item Choice subroutine we used in the Market Menu 
Input routine back in Chapter 6. (The policy of the Authors, in the never- 
ending quest for saving memory, is thus: if you can use a routine more 
than once, make it a subroutine.) 


Let's All Go Down to the Godown: CHAPTER NINE 87 


Line 400 uses the Item Choice subroutine to obtain a value for XI, 
which is a flag that stands for the chosen item. We then RETURN to 
line 410. 

Now line 410 checks to see if we have any of the chosen item aboard 
ship. If not, an error message (telling us we don't have that item aboard) 
is displayed, the No-Can-Do subroutine has its say, and we are 
RETURNed to the Other Options routine. 

If we do have at least one unit of the chosen item aboard our ship, line 
420 asks us how much of it we'd like to move to the godown: 

420 NUn$ = 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT " MOVE HOli) MUCH n ;C$(Xl); n ? "i: 

G0SUB 310: 

IF X$ = "A" THEN INVERSE: 

PRINT CHR$ (fl)X"ALL"i : 

NUN = SG(Xl) : 

NORMAL 

421 IF X$ <> "A" THEN NUN = VAL (NUM$) 

425 HTAB 1 


In this line one oddity needs explanation: CHR$(8) is used to back¬ 
space over our "artificial cursor" just before printing the word "ALL". 

After asking us how much to move to the godown, line 420 GOSUBs 
310, where the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper subroutine gets either a 
number (stored as a string in NUM$) or the letter "A", which tells the 
computer we want to put all of our cargo of the chosen item — SG(X1) — 
into the godown. Either way, we start line 430 with the numerical variable 
NUM holding the amount of cargo we wish to transfer from the ship to 
the godown: 



88 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 

430 IF NUN > SG(X1) THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " ONLY "i: 

a = SG(X1) : 

GOSUB 1330: 

HTAB 11: 

PRINT " UNITS ABOARD! ": 

GOSUB 7L0: 

GOTO 420 

431 IF NUN < = SG(X1) THEN SG(X1) = SG(X1) - NUN: 
SH = SH + NUN: 

GG(X1) = GG(X1) + NUN: 

NUN$ = 

RETURN 


First, line 430 checks to see if we're trying to move more cargo to the 
godown than we have aboard ship. If that's what the player is trying to 
do, then, after an error message and a No-Can-Do, the player is asked 
again, at 420, how much of the item is to be put into the godown. 

If the amount to be moved is legitimate, line 430 goes on to complete 
the transaction, subtracting the chosen amount, NUM, from the amount 
aboard ship, SG(X1), and adding the same amount to the quantity of that 
item in the godown, GG(X1). The available cargo capacity of the ship 
(SH) is also increased by the number of units moved to the godown. 

Finally, line 430 RETURNS us to the Other Options routine. 

Moving cargo From the godown requires similar programming: 

440 GOSUB 400: 

IF GG(X1) =0 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " THE GODOWN HAS NO " i G$ ( XI) =, ° • ": 

GOSUB 7L0: 

RETURN 


Let's All Go Down to the Godown: CHAPTER NINE 89 


450 NUM$ = 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB 1: 

PRINT " MOVE HOlil MUCH "^G$(Xl)i" TO SHIP? n i : 
GOSUB 310: 

IF X$ = "A" THEN PRINT CHR$ (&)\: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL"i: 

NORMAL: 

NUM = GG(X1) 

MSI IF X$ <> "A" THEN NUM = VAL (NUM$) 

MbO IF NUM > GG(X1) THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " JUST "i :<3 = GG(X1) : 

GOSUB 1330: 

PRINT " UNITS STORED!": 

GOSUB 7L0: 

GOTO 4S0 

Mbl IF NUM < = GG(X1) THEN GG(X1) =GG(X1) - NUM: 
SG(X1) = SG(X1) + NUM: 

SH = SH - NUM: 

NUM$ = "": 

RETURN 


Line 440, using the subroutine at 400 (and, via 400, the subroutine at 
260), asks the player which item to move from the godown to the ship. It 
then screens the input to make certain we have some of the item in our 
godown. 

The amount to be moved aboard ship is determined by line 450, which 
calls the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper subroutine at 310, and uses 
either a number or the letter A for "All". 



90 TAIPA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Finally, line 460 either will catch the player trying to move more of an 
item than is available from the godown to the ship, or will complete the 
transfer, updating the amounts of the item in both the ship and the ware¬ 
house, and subtracting appropriately from the ship's available capacity. It 
then RETURNS to the Other Options routine. 

These are the lines we've input in this chapter: 

3AM REM GODOWN SUBROUTINE (B'iO-Mbl) 

3A7 REN GODOWN MENU OTO-BTE) 

3TD GOSUB 130: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT "CARGO <T>0 OR <F>R0N GODOWN?": 

PRINT A$i: 

GOSUB b0: 

IF X$= "T" THEN M10 
BTl IF X$="F" THEN MMO 

3TE IF X$<> "T" AND X$ <> "F" THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 3T0 

315 REN GODOWN CARGO CHOICE SUBROUTINE (MOO) 

MOO VTAB 13: 

PRINT "NOVE WHAT ("TC*")f ": 

GOSUB SbO: 

RETURN 



Let's All Go Down to the Godoivn: CHAPTER NINE 91 


410 GOSUB 400: 

IF SG(X1) = 0 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT "YOU HAVE NO "=,G$(X1):," ABOARD! 
GOSUB 7b0: 

RETURN 

420 NUM$ = 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT " HOVE HOW I1UCH " i G$ (XI) i"? "i: 
GOSUB 310: 

IF X$ = "A" THEN INVERSE: 

PRINT CHR$ (fl) i"ALL"i : 

NUH = SG(X1) : 

NORMAL 

421 IF X$ <> "A" THEN NUd = VAL (NUM$) 

425 HTAB 1 

430 IF NUM > SG(X1) THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " ONLY "i: 
a = SG(X1): 

GOSUB 1330: 

HTAB 11: 

PRINT " UNITS ABOARD! ": 

GOSUB 7L0: 

GOTO 420 



92 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


431 IF NUtl < = SG(X1) THEN SG(X1) = SG(X1) - NUN 
SH = SH + NUN: 

GG(X1) = GG(X1) + NUN: 

NUN$ = 

RETURN 

440 GOSUB 400: 

IF GG(X1) =0 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " THE GODOIdN HAS NO "%G$(XI)• 

GOSUB 7b0: 

RETURN 

450 NUN$ = "": 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " NOVE H0til NUCH " G$ (XI) =." TO SHIPf "i 
GOSUB 310: 

IF X$ = "A" THEN PRINT CHR$ (fl)i: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL" i: 

NORNAL: 

NUN = GG(X1) 

451 IF X$ <> "A" THEN NUN = VAL (NUN$) 

4t,0 IF NUN > GG(X1) THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " JUST "\:<2 = GG(X1): 

GOSUB 1330: 

PRINT " UNITS STORED!": 

GOSUB 7fc>0: 

GOTO 450 



Let’s All Go Down to the Godown: CHAPTER NINE 93 


4bl IF NUM < = GG(X1) THEN GG(X1) =GG(X1) - NUN: 
SG(Xl) = SG(X1) + NUN: 

SH = SH - NUN: 

NUN$ = : 

RETURN 






T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


An International Record Collection 

CHAPTER TEN 


If the player inputs "R", for Records, at the Other Options routine, the 
program GOSUBs to the Records subroutine. 

The Records subroutine is used to display the highest and the lowest 
prices the player has encountered in the various ports, as well as the 
number of times the player has visited the ports in question. That kind of 
information is the most important kind of data to a trader. It gives a tai- 
pan the knowledge to plan trading routes and strategy. A player need not 
keep extensive records of prices. The computer will do that automatically. 

Since there is nowhere near enough room on a single screen to display 
all of the highest and lowest prices the player has encountered in all of the 
ports visited, the Records subroutine gives us two modes of calling up 
those prices: by Port and by Item. 

When using the Port mode, we are first asked for our choice of port, 
then we are told how many times we've been in that port, and are then 
given the highest and lowest prices we've yet encountered for every time 
in that port. 

In the Item mode, we are first asked which item we want to know 
about, then we are given the number of visits we've made to each port. 


95 



96 TAIPA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


and the highest and lowest prices we've encountered for the chosen item 
in every port we've visited. 

In either mode, prices for items in ports we haven't visited will not be 
displayed, and a question mark ("?") will be shown instead. If we've 
been in a port only once, the high and low prices for items there will be 
the same. (We needn't have actually bought or sold any of the items in 
the records — the records for all items will be updated every time we 
enter a port.) 

The Records subroutine starts with these lines: 

5TS REM RECORDS SUBROUTINE (b00-7El) 

too HOME: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A*:,: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " RECORDS OF HIGH & LOlil PRICES": 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$=.: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT: 

PRINT " RECORDS BY P)0RT OR I)TEM?": 

PRINT " -" 

fc,01 VTAB 10: 

PRINT " PRESS <SPACEBAR> UHEN FINISHED": 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

blO GOSUB HO: 

IF X$ = "P" THEN GOSUB 7E0: 

GOTO LEO 


An International Record Collection: CHAPTER TEN 97 


bll IF X$ = "I" THEN PRINT: 

VTAB 5: 

PRINT 
PRINT A$: 

GOSUB ttQ: 

GOTO b7D 

fc,12 IF X$ = " " THEN HONE: 

RETURN 

b!3 IF X$ <> "P" AND X$ <> "I" 

AND X$ <> " " THEN GOSUB 770: 
GOTO bid 


Lines 600 and 601 simply gives us a Records Menu. Note that the 
expected input is limited to pressing either the P, I or the "spacebar" 
keys. 

Handling this first input are lines 610 to 612. Line 610 GOSUBs 60 to get 
a character to be held in X$, then, if the input is a P, we GOSUB to the 
Port Choice subroutine, which will print out a list of ports from which we 
may choose. 

The Port Choice subroutine begins at line 720: 

715 REN PORT CHOICE SUBROUTINE (720) 


720 FOR I = D 
VTAB (I / 
PRINT A$: 
VTAB (I / 
PRINT In" 
HTAB 20: 
PRINT I + 
NEXT I: 
PRINT 


TO 1 STEP 2: 

2) + 4: 

2) + 4: 

"n L$(I) n : 

In" ";L$I + 1): 



98 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


721 PRINT " 
PRINT: 
INVERSE: 
PRINT A$: 
NORMAL: 
RETURN 


UHICH PORT (0- e l)? 


This subroutine is very simple — it just prints out the number and the 
name of each port, prompts the player to input the number of the chosen 
port, and RETURNS to 610. 

Then line 610 (still assuming that the player has chosen the "Port" 
mode) GOTOs 620: 

b20 GOSUB L0: 

IF ASC (X$) > 47 AND ASC (X$) < Sfl THEN X = VAL 
(X$) 

b21 IF ASC (X$) < 4fl OR ASC (X$) > 57 THEN GOSUB 770: 
GOTO b20 


Line 620 uses the Get String subroutine (60) to put a character into X$, 
and checks that it's a numerical character. If the key pressed isn't a num¬ 
ber, line 621 gives us the Input Error note, and then we are given another 
chance. Otherwise, the numerical character in X$ is converted by line 620 
into a value in X, and we continue to lines 630, 640, 641 and 650: 

b30 HOME: 

PRINT " "• n L*<X)i" PRICES (VISITS:"iV(X)=.") n : 
INVERSE: 

PRINT " ITEM HIGH LOU "i: 

NORMAL: 

FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

PRINT n "^G$(I)i: 

HTAB 21 


An International Record Collection: CHAPTER TEN 99 


t> 4 □ IF H (X -i I) = 0 THEN PRINT " f";: 

HTAB 30: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " "i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " 

NEXT I 

bMl IF H(X11) <> 0 THEN HTAB 21: 

PRINT H (X11)i: 

HTAB 30: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " "i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " n iL(X11) : 

NEXT I 

fc.50 INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOTO 700 

Here's where the list of high and low prices for each item in the 
selected port is displayed. This routine could be much simpler if we'd not 
bothered to put in graphics to format it neatly, and if we'd been willing to 
just show the prices as "0" for any port the player hadn't visited. But the 
Authors are convinced that graphics can enhance the readability of a 
screen, and that putting in question marks for prices in ports we haven't 
visited is more accurate and much less misleading. 

In line 630 we first HOME to clear the screen. Then we display at the 
top of the screen, the name of the port, L$(X), the word "PRICES", and 
then the number of times we've visited the chosen port. (Remember that 
the numerical variable, X, now holds the number of the port we've cho¬ 
sen.) This serves to give us a heading for the information which will fol¬ 
low. That heading might look something like this: 


SINGAPORE PRICES (VISITS: 2) 


100 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Line 630 then continues with a line using INVERSE characters embed¬ 
ded in a bright bar. This line serves to identify the three vertical columns 
which will go below. Thus far, we might have something like the follow¬ 
ing displayed on the screen: 

SINGAPORE PRICES (VISITS: 2) 


Finally, line 630 starts a loop which increments I from 0 to 5, and starts 
printing the names of our six trade goods. 

The start of line 640 checks to see if the highest price for any item in the 
chosen port is zero. This can be true only if the variable which holds the 
high price, H(X,I), has never been given a value since initialization. And 
that can only occur if we’ve never been to this port. So if the value of 
H(X,I) is zero, line 640 prints question marks (with bright blocks between 
them) instead of the high and low prices for such items. (In the Port 
mode, the Records subroutine will naturally show only question marks 
for all items in a port we haven't visited.) 

If the high and low prices are known, line 641 goes on to display those 
prices. 

A bright bar (an INVERSE A$) is displayed by line 650, and we then 
GOTO line 700. 

Lines 700 to 711 are used simply to allow us to look at the display of 
prices, then press the spacebar when we've seen enough: 

700 PRINT ° PRESS <SPACEBAR> WHEN FINISHED" =i 

710 G0SUB b0: 

IF x $ = " " THEN bOO 

711 GOTO 710 


The total screen in the Port mode of the Records subroutine should 
look like this to us: 


An International Record Collection: CHAPTER TEN 101 


SINGAPORE PRICES (VISITS: 2) 
#ITEH###############HIGH#######L0liJ###### 


OPIUM 

2b213 

# 

lbS04 

SILK 

1D2A7 

# 

7b42 

TEA 

13b2 

# 

1111 

ARMS 

231 

# 

22b 

PEPPER 

21 

# 

27 

RICE 

7 

# 

b 


######################################## 
PRESS <SPACEBAR> WHEN FINISHED 


When the spacebar is pressed, line 710 throws us right back to line 600, 
where we once again have the choice of viewing high and low prices 
either in the Port or Item mode. This time, let's suppose we choose the 
Item mode. Line 611 will first have us GOSUB 660: 


bbU VTAB 5: 

FOR I = D TO S: 

PRINT " "iG$(I) i: 

NEXT I: 

PRINT: 

PRINT " IdHAT ITEM ("iTCSi f": 
PRINT: 

PRINT A$: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB 2b0: 

RETURN 


This line displays the names of all the items of trade, and asks the 
player for which item price records are to be displayed. It then GOSUBs 
260 (the same Item Choice subroutine used by both the Market and the 
Godown routines), and thus RETURNS briefly to 611 with the chosen 
item's number held in variable XI. 



102 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Next, line 611 immediately GOTOs line 670, where the Item mode dis¬ 
play starts, continuing with lines 680, 681 and 690: 

b?0: HOME: 

PRINT " "=,G$(XD i" PRICES": 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " PORT VISITS HIGH LOW "i: 

NORMAL: 

FOR I = 0 TO 1: 

PRINT L$(I)i 

b6B VTAB 1+3: 

HTAB 12: 

PRINT V(I) i : 

IF L(IiXl) = 0 THEN HTAB 21: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " f"i: 

HTAB 32: 

PRINT 
NEXT I: 

GOTO b^D 

bfil IF L(InXl) <> □ THEN HTAB 21: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " "i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " "iH(IiXI)i: 

HTAB 31: 

PRINT " "a(IiXl) : 

NEXT I 


blD INVERSE: 


An International Record Collection: CHAPTER TEN 103 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

These lines are so similar to the routine used in the Port mode that they 
require no further explanation. The program "falls through" to lines 700, 
710 and 711, which we used in the Port mode to terminate the display. 
Here's how an Item mode display might look: 

TEA PRICES 

#P0RT#####VISITS####HIGH####L0W######### 


HONGKONG 

2 

# 

70S 

bb7 

FOOCHOW 

D 

# 

? 

? 

SHANGHAI 

0 

# 

? 

? 

NAGASAKI 

0 

# 

? 

? 

MANILA 

0 

# 

f 

? 

SINGAPORE 

3 

# 

13b2 

im 

BATAVIA 

1 

# 

13bfl 

13bfl 

SAIGON 

0 

# 

? 


CALCUTTA 

1 

# 

1777 

1777 

LIVERPOOL 

D 

# 

? 



############### ######## # ################ 
PRESS <SPACEBAR> WHEN FINISHED 

We can now hit the spacebar once, and we're back to the Records 
Menu, and hit it again, and we RETURN all the way back to 381, which in 
turn has us immediately GOTO 360, the Other Options routine. Now 
we're ready to explore some of the other Other Options. But first, here 
are all the lines we've put into our computer in this chapter: 

STS REM RECORDS SUBROUTINE (fc.UO-721) 

b00 HOME: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$i: 



104 


TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


NORMAL: 

PRINT " RECORDS OF HIGH & LOW PRICES": 
INVERSE: 

PRINT A$^: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT: 

PRINT " RECORDS BY P)ORT OR I) TEMf ": 
PRINT " _" 

bOl VTAB 10: 

PRINT " PRESS <SPACEBAR> WHEN FINISHED" 
PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

blO GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = "P" THEN GOSUB 7E0: 

GOTO bBO 

bll IF X$ = "I" THEN PRINT: 

VTAB 5: 

PRINT A$i: 

PRINT A$: 

GOSUB bbO: 

GOTO b?0 

blE IF X$ = " " THEN HOME: 

RETURN 

bl3 IF X$ <> "P" AND X$ <> "I" 

AND X$ <> " " THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO blO 


An International Record Collection: CHAPTER TEN 105 


L20 GOSUB bO: 

IF ASC (X$) > 47 AND ASC (X$) < 5fi THEN X = VAL 
(X$) 

L21 IF ASC (X$) < 4fl OR ASC (X$) > 57 THEN GOSUB 770: 
GOTO taE□ 

L30 HOME: 

PRINT " "i L$(X) ^" PRICES (VISITSiV( X)i")": 
INVERSE: 

PRINT " ITEM HIGH LOU "i: 

NORMAL: 

FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

PRINT " "*G*(I)i: 

HTAB 21 

L40 IF H(XiI) = 0 THEN PRINT " ?"*: 

HTAB 30: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " 

NEXT I 

L41 IF H(XiI) <> 0 THEN HTAB 21: 

PRINT H(Xal)i: 

HTAB 30: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT n 
NORMAL: 

PRINT " 

NEXT I 


L (X n I) 



106 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 

bSO INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOTO 700 

bbO VTAB 5: 

FOR I = D TO 5: 

PRINT " "iG*(I> , : 

NEXT I: 

PRINT: 

PRINT " WHAT ITEM ("iTC$i 
PRINT: 

PRINT A$: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB BbO: 

RETURN 

b7D HOME: 

PRINT " "iG$(Xl)=," PRICES": 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " PORT VISITS HIGH LOW 

NORMAL: 

FOR I = D TO T: 

PRINT L*(I) i 

bfiO VTAB 1+3: 

HTAB IB: 

PRINT V(I) i : 

IF L(IiXl) = 0 THEN HTAB 21: 

INVERSE: 



An International Record Collection: CHAPTER TEN 107 


PRINT " 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " : 

HTAB 32: 

PRINT 
NEXT I: 

GOTO b^O 

bfll IF L(IiXI) <> D THEN HTAB 21: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT " " '■<: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " "iH(11XI) i: 

HTAB 31: 

PRINT " "iL(11XI) : 

NEXT I 

b'lO INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

700 PRINT " PRESS <SPACEBAR> WHEN FINISHED"i 

710 GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = " " THEN bOO 

711 GOTO 710 

715 REM PORT CHOICE SUBROUTINE (720) 

720 FOR I = 0 TO 1 STEP 2: 

VTAB (I / 2) + 4: 



108 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


PRINT A$: 

VTAB (I / 2) + M: 

PRINT Ii" "iL$(I)i: 

HTAB 20: 

PRINT I + li" + 1) : 

NEXT I: 

PRINT 

721 PRINT " WHICH PORT (O-T)f 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

RETURN 






Elder Brother Wu at the office 



T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Brother, Can You Spare a Dime? 

CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Choosing "L" for lender at the Other Options routine is, like the Godown 
option, possible only when we are in Hongkong. It brings us face to face 
with the chief of the Iron Lotus Triad, Elder Wu. 

The Iron Lotus Triad has come a long way under the leadership of our 
fictitious Elder Brother Wu. In the "old days", when the triad had been 
headquartered in Foochow, spies sent by the hated Manchus had con¬ 
stantly acted as agents provocateur, sparking poorly-planned riots and 
rebellions. As a result, members and leaders of the Iron Lotus had often 
been caught, tortured, and beheaded. The Triad's treasury was regularly 
"impounded" by thieving officials who kept it all for themselves. 

But Elder Brother Wu had changed all that. He had brought the head¬ 
quarters of the Iron Lotus Triad to Hongkong. Secure Hongkong, where 
the British barbarians kept the Manchu barbarians at a safe distance. 
Here Wu had established secret schools which taught his braves the 
deadly Iron Lotus variant of Chinese boxing. A base from which the Iron 
Lotus could spread its underworld and political tentacles far into China 
and the Chinese communities of Southeast Asia. A prosperous haven, 
where Wu had transformed the financial aid services the triad provided 


111 



112 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


to members into a lucrative moneylending business, which bankrolled 
even some of the Western barbarian traders. 

When we press the "L" key on our Apple II, we must remember it 
means we're visiting this Brother Wu. 

Line 381 of the Other Options routine sends us to the beginning of the 
Lender routine: 

4L.5 REI1 LENDER SUBROUTINE (470-SfiU) 

47D GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT "EWANCHAI DISTRICT OF HONGKONG: HOME OF "=. 
b)$n"]l n : 

PRINT GREETS YOU-. TAIPAN-. AND WISHES YOU 

WELL-": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

VTAB 14: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT A$ 


This line amounts to a simple greeting by Wu, followed by the use of 
the Delay subroutine to give the player time to read it — or the option of 
cutting the message short using the spacebar. 

Way back in line 10, we'd put the words, "ELDER BROTHER WU" into 
W$. This string will be used so often in the Lender routine that the mem¬ 
ory saved by this technique should become obvious. 

Wu's greeting continues in line 480: 

4fl0 VTAB 14: 

PRINT "WU STATES THAT HIS IRON LOTUS": 

PRINT "TRIAD HAS BEEN WATCHING YOU-": 

GOSUB 7A0 



Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?: CHAPTER ELEVEN 113 


We finally cut the social graces and get down to business in the next 
five lines: 

4^0 VTAB 14: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB 14: 

PRINT W$i" ASKS-. DO YOU": 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT "WISH TO B) ORROW P)AYi OR <3)UIT? 

NUI1$ = "" 

500 GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = "B" THEN LD$ = "BORROW": 

LD = 1 

501 IF X$ = "P" THEN LD$ = "PAY": 

LD = E 

SDE IF X$ = "(3" THEN PRINT: 

GOSUB 1340: 

RETURN 

S03 IF X$ <> "B" AND X$ <> "P" 

AND X$ <> "(3" THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 500 


These lines are typical of the kind of menu and menu-handling rou¬ 
tines we're using in Taipan. Note the use of LD$, which will allow the 
dual use of a later line (to save memory, as usual). We're also setting the 
variable LD as a flag to indicate what type of business we're doing with 



114 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Wu. The input of "Q" is our escape route from the home of Elder Brother 
Wu. It puts us back at the Other Options routine. 

If we've decided to borrow money from Wu, line 510 represents that 
gentleman's decisionmaking as to whether or not he wants to loan us 
anything at the moment: 

510 IF LD = 1 AND (B = 1 OR D > 1E4) THEN GOSUB 1340: 
VTAB 15: 

PRINT "WU REGRETS THAT HE CANNOT LOAN": 

PRINT "YOU MORE AT THIS TIME-. TAIPAN-";: 

GOSUB 7L0 
GOTO 450 


Elder Brother Wu's logic here translates as: "That barbarian wants to 
borrow money from me, eh? Then I'll check to see if he has either bor¬ 
rowed previously this time in port, or already owes me more than 10,000 
in cash. If so. I'll tell him to fly a kite — but politely." 

The "B = l" in line 510 is a check of a flag which is set later in the 
Lender routine to indicate that the player has borrowed from Wu. (B is 
cleared to a value of 0 whenever we enter port.) 

If we get past this initial rejection, the next three lines will process the 
input of the amount to be borrowed or repaid: 

530 GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT "H0U MUCH DO YOU WISH TO "iLD*;"-.": 

PRINT "TAIPAN? ";: 

GOSUB 310: 

NUN = VAL (NUI1$) 

530 IF X$ = "A" AND LD = 1 THEN PRINT CHR$ (fl);: 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL";: 

NORMAL: 

NUM = C * 3 


Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?: CHAPTER ELEVEN 115 


531 IF X$ ■ "A" 
INVERSE: 
PRINT "ALL" 
NORMAL: 

NUM = D 


AND LD = E THEN 


PRINT CHR$ 


Line 520 asks the quantity of cash we wish to either borrow from or pay 
to Wu. (Lines 500 and 501 had put either "BORROW" or "PAY" into 
LD$.) Next, the line GOSUBs the Sooper Dooper Number Scooper, then 
converts any number characters in NUM$ into a value to be held 
in NUM. 

Then lines 530 and 531 handle, respectively, the input of "A" for "All" 
for borrowing, and for paying. Line 530 sets the amount to be borrowed 
to twice the player’s cash (C). Line 531 sets the amount to be repaid to the 
full amount owed (D). (But what if we've got less cash than we owe? 
We'll handle that possibility in a moment.) 

Line 540 routes program flow to line 560, if we're paying Elder Brother 
Wu. If we're borrowing, line 541 checks to see if we're trying to borrow 
more than our credit limit with Wu will allow: 

540 IF LD = E THEN 5L0 

541 IF NUM > S * C THEN VTAB 15: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT Id*:," REGRETS THAT HE": 

PRINT "CANNOT LOAN YOU THAT MUCH."i: 

G0SUB 7L0: 

GOTO 450: 


Wu's simple formula of lending is thus: you can borrow only twice 
what you already have in cash. You show him your cash, he gives 
you his. 

The convenience of this credit check comes free — with his 100% inter¬ 
est rates. 



116 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


(Notice, again, that if we're paying Wu, line 540 has the program 
GOTO 560, skipping the lines between.) 

The B flag is set in line 550, to indicate we've borrowed once this time 
in Hongkong. Here's the whole line: 

550 B = l: 

C = C + NUfl: 

D = D + NUII: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 450 


Line 550 adds the borrowed money to our cash, adds the same amount 
to our debt, updates the screen to show these changes, then tosses us 
back to the main Lender menu at 490. 

The rest of the Lender routine handles paying Wu. Remember the 
question we raised about what to do if we tried to pay back more than we 
had in cash? Lines 560 and 561 take care of that, and a few other things 
as well: 

5b0 IF NUII > C THEN NUM = C: 

D = D -C: 

C = 0: 

GOSUB 130: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT U$=," THANKS YOU-,": 

PRINT "TAIPAN-, FOR THE PAYMENT • "i: 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

IF D < 0 THEN D = 0: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 450 

Sbl IF NUM > C AND D > = 0 THEN GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 450 



Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?: CHAPTER ELEVEN 117 


First, we've checked to determine whether we're trying to repay Wu 
more money than we have. In such a case, Wu takes all of our cash, our 
cash and our debt are corrected, and we are given Wu's thanks. If, addi¬ 
tionally, we've paid Wu more than we owe him, line 560 has him consider 
accounts even. (Wu will not consider himself in debt to us!. The player, 
like a real taipan, will just have to be careful.) In either case, either at the 
end of line 560 or line 561, we're now routed back to the main 
Lender menu. 

In line 570 the lender routine checks for our having input a payment 
which is larger than our debt, yet is less than or equal to our cash. (We know 
that the payment will be less than our cash because the program 
wouldn't have gotten past the last line if it weren't.) 

Here is how line 570 handles its task: 


570 IF NUI1 > D THEN D = 0: 

C = C - NUN: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT WSi" THANKS YOU FOR YOUR STARTLING GENER0S 
ITY!" i : 

G0SUB 130: 

G0SUB 7A0: 

GOTO 450 


Wu has just taken what we offered to pay him. He's grateful, because 
he can now apply this windfall toward the business of the Iron Lotus 
Triad. And we can't get the extra money back! 

The more usual type of repayment is handled in line 580: 

SfiO C = C - NUN: 

D = D - NUN: 

G0SUB 130: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT 



118 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


" ACCEPTS YOUR PAYMENT WITH GRATITUDE-, TAIPAN 

n ■ . 

-i • 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOTO MID 


Here we've paid Wu with money we actually have, and have paid only 
all or part of what we owe him. The program takes us back to line 490, 
where we can Quit the Lender routine and go back to the Other 
Options routine. 

These are the program lines we've introduced in this chapter: 

4bS REM LENDER SUBROUTINE (470-560) 

470 GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IB: 

PRINT "EWANCHAI DISTRICT OF HONGKONG: HOME OF "=, 
li)$i"3 n : 

PRINT W$=i" GREETS YOU-, TAIPAN-, AND WISHES YOU 
WELL.”: 

GOSUB 760: 

VTAB 14: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT A$ 

460 VTAB 14: 

PRINT "WU STATES THAT HIS IRON LOTUS": 

PRINT "TRIAD HAS BEEN WATCHING YOU-": 

GOSUB 760 

4T0 VTAB 14: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT A$: 


Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?: CHAPTER ELEVEN 119 


VTAB 14: 

PRINT W$i" ASKSi DO YOU": 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT "WISH TO B)ORROWi P)AY, OR <2)UIT? "s: 

NUM$ = "" 

500 GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = "B" THEN LD$ = "BORROW": 

LD = 1 

501 IF X$ = "P" THEN LD$ = "PAY": 

LD = 2 

502 IF X$ = "<2" THEN PRINT: 

GOSUB 1340: 

RETURN 

503 IF X$ <> "B" AND X$ <> "P" 

AND X$ <> "(3" THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 500 

S10 IF LD = 1 AND (B = 1 OR D > 1E4) THEN GOSUB 1340: 
VTAB IS: 

PRINT "WU REGRETS THAT HE CANNOT LOAN": 

PRINT "YOU MORE AT THIS TIME n TAIPAN•"i: 

GOSUB 7U0: 

GOTO 410 

520 GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT "HOW MUCH DO YOU WISH TO LD$ : 

PRINT "TAIPANf "i: 

GOSUB 310: 

NUM = VAL (NUM$) 



120 


TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


530 IF X$ = "A" AND LD = 1 THEN PRINT CHR$ (fl) 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL":, : 

NORMAL: 

NUM = C * 2 

531 IF X$ = "A" AND LD = E THEN PRINT CHR$ (5) 
INVERSE: 

PRINT "ALL" =i: 

NORMAL: 

NUM = D 

540 IF LD = £ THEN 5L0 

541 IF NUM > E * C THEN VTAB 15: 

PRINT A$: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT li)$i" REGRETS THAT HE": 

PRINT "CANNOT LOAN YOU THAT MUCH.":,: 

GOSUB 7b□: 

GOTO MHO 

550 B = l: 

C = C + NUM: 

D = D + NUM: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO MHO 

SLO IF NUM > C THEN NUM = C: 

D = D - C: 

C = 0: 

GOSUB 130: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT THANKS YOU-,": 


Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?: CHAPTER ELEVEN 121 


PRINT "TAIPAN-, FOR THE PAYMENT-"i: 

GOSUB 7flO: 

IF D < D THEN D = 0: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 410 

5bl IF NUM > C AND D > = 0 THEN GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 410 

570 IF NUM > D THEN D = 0: 

C = C - NUM: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT lilSi" THANKS YOU FOR YOUR STARTLING GENEROS 
ITY!" i : 

GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 7A0: 

GOTO 410 

5A0 C = C - NUM: 

1 = D - NUM: 

GOSUB 130: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT 

n ACCEPTS YOUR PAYMENT WITH GRATITUDE-, TAIPAN 



GOSUB 7AO: 
GOTO 410 





T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


A Gold Watch and a Hearty Handshake 

CHAPTER TWELVE 


The last option available to us at the Other Options menu is "E" for 
Embark — but that option (and all the things that can happen at sea) will 
require several chapters to cover effectively. So let's skip "Embark" until 
later. Instead, we'll press "T" for Trade, which gets us to the Market 
Menu. 

If we were now to input "R", for Retire, the program will GOTO the 
That's All Folks routine. 

The That's All Folks routine is the retirement and scoring portion of 
Taipan. The first line of the routine is 1300: 

lETS REM THAT’S ALL FOLKS (1300-1321) 

1300 HOME: 

Nld = C - D: 
d = Nti) / GT: 

VTAB 4: 

INVERSE: 


123 



124 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


PRINT A$i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT: 

PRINT "YOUR SCORE-i BASED UPON TIME AND YOUR": 

PRINT "NET WORTH (EXCLUDING STOCK) IS "i: 

GOSUB 1330: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

This pretty well establishes that the object of the game of Taipan is to 
make as much money as possible in the least possible time. Line 1300 first 
clears the screen. Next, the variable NW (for Net Worth) is defined as 
being our cash minus our debt. Then NW is divided by GT (Game Time), 
which has been updated each time we've gone on an ocean voyage. The 
result of this division is placed into the variable Q, so it can be displayed 
by the Big Number subroutine. The line goes on to give its message and 
to display the player's score. 

The following line is used to allow the player to return to playing the 
game if the That's All Folks routine was reached via the Market Menu, 
rather than by the player's "death" by pirates or shipwreck. (We'll see 
those less pleasant ways of getting there in later chapters.) By using line 
1310, we are able to do two things — allow a player to recover from an 
accidental input of "R" at the Market routine, and permit the player to 
check out his or her score in the middle of the game. 

This is how we've done it: 

1310 IF X$ = "R" THEN PRINT "WOULD YOU LIKE TO PICK UP 

THIS": 

PRINT "GAME WHERE YOU LEFT OFF (Y/N)f": 

GOSUB L0: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN HOME: 

GOTO 120 

The routines which might have "killed" us are designed in such a way 
that X$ would never contain an "R" if we were to be wiped out at sea. So 



A Gold Watch and a Hearty Handshake: CHAPTER TWELVE 125 


we use the presence of an "R" in X$ to let us know that we'd reached this 
routine voluntarily, from the Market Menu. If that's the case, line 1310 
operates. (Otherwise the program fails through to the next line.) 

If we now press the "Y" key, we are taken right back to the Market 
Menu, with the game continuing as if nothing had happened. 

If, however, we were either killed off in the game, or had not chosen to 
continue the game, lines 1320 and 1321 come into play: 

1320 GOSUB 1340 
VTAB 10: 

PRINT A*:,: 

PRINT "DO YOU WISH TO START OVER (Y/N)/": 

GOSUB L.0: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN RUN 

1321 END 

All we do here is give the player a chance to start the game over from the 
top. This way we don't have to enter "RUN" every time we play the 
game. 

Here are the lines we've used in this short chapter: 

1205 REN THAT'S ALL FOLKS (1300-1321) 

1300 HONE: 

NU = C - D: 

<2 = Nld / GT: 

VTAB 4: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$^: 

N0RNAL: 

PRINT: 

PRINT "YOUR SCORE-. BASED UPON TINE AND YOUR": 

PRINT "NET UJ0RTH (EXCLUDING STOCK) IS "i: 

GOSUB 1330: 



126 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL 

1310 IF X$ = "R" THEN PRINT "WOULD YOU LIKE TO PICK UP 
THIS": 

PRINT "GAME WHERE YOU LEFT OFF (Y/N)f": 

GOSUB LO: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN HOME: 

GOTO 120 

1320 GOSUB 1340 
VTAB 10: 

PRINT A$;: 

PRINT "DO YOU WISH TO START OVER (Y/N)/": 

GOSUB taO: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN RUN 


1321 END 




CALricu 


**• »•• 1 M toe 




CAcAjUs s'~ 






l KariAJM-''—. 


> (jjA 






'&rict( / cL^ 


*kf ,, r''.■''“v""”""'" 


J \ '* . \> : /<M/jU(LktVur\ 

Co 


1 


. J 

/ FoJuJslW 




;..... /-. 


^Ku/"a*S}**- • 




CUcc/&sn^ 


'xfoui/ls C/ioriOL-. / Vr..,-iv<:. 

jdjljOL- 







T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Anchors Azveigh! 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


Now let's go back to the one choice in the Other Options routine which 
we haven't yet explored: "E" for "Embark". 

We previously took a geographical history tour of the ten ports o' call 
in Taipan. Now it's time for the player to visit some of them. The Other 
Options routine has us GOTO 730 to begin our voyage: 

725 REM EMBARK (730-751) 

730 IF SH < 0 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT "YOUR SHIP IS OVERLOADED-, TAIPAN 
PRINT A$: 

GOSUB 7L0: 

GOTO 3L0 


129 



130 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 

731 IF SH > = □ THEN HOME: 

PRINT TAB( 11) i : 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "EMBARKING": 

NORMAL: 

PRINT TAB( 5)i"FROM "iL$(L>: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

IF L = I THEN NEXT I: 

GOTO 740 

732 IF L <> I THEN PRINT TAB( 10)ili" "iLSd): 
NEXT I 


Line 730 begins by preventing us from sailing our ship with more than 
a capacity load of cargo. The variable SH holds the cwuilcible capacity of 
the craft, not the load the ship actually has aboard. In other words, if our 
ship has a capacity of 50 units, a cargo of 23 units of rice and 20 units of 
arms would give us an available capacity of 7 units. If we were to add 8 
units of pepper, we could not sail. With an overload, we get a message 
display, a No-Can-Do buzz, and the program will GOTO 360, the Other 
Options routine. We must either transfer excess cargo to the godown (if 
we're in Hongkong), or sell enough to allow us to sail. 

Think of excess cargo as not actually being aboard ship, but standing in 
stacks of cases on the dock. Thus we can have any amount of cargo tem¬ 
porarily "aboard ship" while in port. But we're not able to leave it on the 
docks when we embark. The cargo must either be in our godown, or 
must fit aboard ship. Eventually, if the player prospers as a taipan, it will 
be possible to obtain a larger ship. But cargo capacity will be a limiting 
bottleneck at many points throughout the game—a bottleneck which is 
necessary to ensure challenging play. 



Anchors Aweigh!: CHAPTER THIRTEEN 131 


But if we're not overloaded, lines 731 and 732 go on to give us a display 
which shows us the port from which we're embarking, and then run 
through a loop which prints the numbers and names of all the other 
ports. 

Line 740 prompts the player to select the next port o' call: 

740 PRINT: 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT "WHAT PORT O’ CALL-. TAIPAN (0-5)?" 

After the prompt, the next line processes the player's choice: 

750 GOSUB L0: 

IF ASC (X*) > 47 AND ASC (X$) < 5fl AND VAL (X$) <> 
L 

THEN P0 = VAL (X$) : 

GOTO 5fl0 

751 GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 750 


Line 750 makes sure that the input character is a number, and that it is 
not the number of the port the player is in. If the input is not a number, or 
is the number of the port we're in (L), line 751 has us GOSUB the Input 
Error subroutine, and then try for another input. But if the input is 
acceptable, the program will put the number of the chosen port into vari¬ 
able PO, then it will GOTO 980, where the Voyage routine begins: 


575 REN VOYAGE (5fl0-ia e J0) 



132 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


‘laO HOME: 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$=,: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " SEA VOYAGE FROM "=,L$(L): 

PRINT " TO "iL$(PO) : 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

HOME: 

ET = ABS (LO(L) - LO(PO)) 

Tfil IF INT ( RND (1) * 50) + 1 > 

INT ( RND (1) * ET) + 1 THEN 1E10 

These lines do several things. First, line 980 shows us where we've 
been and where we're going. Last, it computes the raw value for ET, the 
"Elapsed Time" (in days) of the voyage. This uses a tricky method based 
upon subtracting the "location" figure of the port we're leaving, "LO(L)" 
from the location number of the next port o' call, "L(PO)". The resulting 
number is then made an "absolute number"—any minus sign is 
removed. That gives us the raw number of days required for the voyage. 
(Later, that figure will be processed further to give a bit of randomness to 
the voyage's duration.) 

Line 981 then makes a decision as to whether or not there might be 
"trouble" during the voyage, by comparing the value of a random frac¬ 
tion times fifty (plus one), to the value of another random fraction multi¬ 
plied by "ET" (plus one). Here we use a technique which the Authors 
favor: a combination of controllable and random factors. Since the length 
of the voyage can be controlled by the choice of port o' call, there is an 
element we might loosely call "free will". And since a random factor 
operates on a number we have "chosen", there is sort of a "fate" factor as 
well. The longer the voyage, the more chance of trouble at sea. It seems a 
decent way of mimicking reality. 



Anchors Aweighh CHAPTER THIRTEEN 133 


If our algorithm finds that there is going to be no possibility of trouble, 
the program will go to 1290, the Arrival routine. But if trouble is 
"expected" we go on to the next lines: 

565 REM STORM (550-10BB) 

no IF RND (1) > .5 THEN 1030 

551 VTAB 13: 

PRINT B$=,: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " STORM-, TAIPAN ! " : 

GOSUB 7b0 


Uh, oh! Looks like we're not having smooth sailing on our maiden 
voyage. There's now about a 50% chance we'll be sent to the Pirates rou¬ 
tine starting at 1030 ("IF RND (1) > .5 THEN 1030"). Remember, line 981 
has already determined we're in for trouble, by not sending us to the 
safety of line 1290. If we didn't get sent off to the Pirates routine right 
away, now we're headed into a storm. 

Let's see if we can ride out this gale: 

1000 IF RND (1) > .E THEN 10E0 

1001 VTAB 14: 

PRINT " ANY PORT IN A STORM, ": 

GOSUB 7b0: 

P0 = INT ( RND (1) * 10) : 

IF P0 = L THEN VTAB 14: 

PRINT " UE CAN'T MAKE IT, 

T AIPAN, ": 

SR = 0: 

GOTO 1050 



134 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


In line 1000, we first give the player an 80% chance of riding out the 
storm unscathed. If this is the case, we GOTO 1020. 

If the storm's really a problem, line 1001 will have the ship try to put in 
at any port at all. We use the random choice of an emergency haven also 
as a way of finding out if we've survived the storm: if the number of the 
haven is the same as the number of the port we've just departed, then we 
didn't make it. (There's no logical justification for this, except the fact 
that it's a simple and memory-cheap way to do it.) If we "can't make it", 
we GOTO 1090, where there's a routine that tells us of our fate, and 
routes us to the That's All Folks routine. (Since line 1090 is also used 
when we're sunk by pirates, we'll cover that in a later chapter.) 

Assuming we've survived the storm, however, the next four lines let us 
know: 

1010 VTAB 14: 

PRINT " WE’RE HEADED 
FOR SHELTERi ": 

G0SUB 7S0 

1020 VTAB 14: 

PRINT " WE RODE OUT THE 
STORM-. TAIPAN! ": 

G0SUB 7A0 

1021 IF RND (1) > -5 THEN ‘HO 

1022 GOTO 12T0 


Line 1021 will, half the time, send us back to line 990, where we may 
have further troubles. If not, line 1022 sends us directly to the Arrival rou¬ 
tine at line 1290. 

That's all there is to the Embark routine and the "storm" portion of the 
Voyage routine. 


Anchors Aweigh!: CHAPTER THIRTEEN 135 


Some words about how we handled storms: this is one kind of danger 
which we can never, as players, totally eliminate. 

There is always a small chance that in any given voyage, our ship will 
founder in high seas. The chance is exceedingly small, however. But the 
Authors feel that it would be unrealistic in the extreme to allow an 
"unsinkable" ship to sail the simulated seas of the 1860's. Even now, no 
ship, however huge and powerful, can be considered completely safe 
from the ravages of oceanic conditions. 

The following is a recap of the lines we've introduced in this chapter: 
7E5 REM EMBARK (730-751) 

730 IF SH < 0 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT "YOUR SHIP IS OVERLOADED-. TAIPAN 
PRINT A$: 

GOSUB 7L0: 

GOTO 3L.0 

731 IF SH > = 0 THEN HONE: 

PRINT TAB( 11)i: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT "EMBARKING": 

NORMAL: 

PRINT TAB ( T"FR0M " i L$ (L ) : 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

FOR I = 0 TO T: 

IF L = I THEN NEXT I: 

GOTO 740 

732 IF L <> I THEN PRINT TAB ( 10)ili" "^L$(I): 

NEXT I 



136 


TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


740 PRINT: 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT "WHAT PORT O' CALL-. TAIPAN (0-1>f" 

750 GOSUB LO: 

IF ASC (X$) > 47 AND ASC (X$) < 5fl AND VAL (X$) <> 
L 

THEN PO = VAL (X$) : 

GOTO HAD 

751 GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 750 

H75 REM VOYAGE (TA0-12T0) 

HAO HOME: 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " SEA VOYAGE FROM "iL$(L) : 

PRINT " TO "iL$(PO) : 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB 7A0: 

HOME: 

ET = ABS (LO(L) - LO(PO)) 

1A1 IF INT ( RND (1) * 50) + 1 > 

INT ( RND (1) * ET) + 1 THEN 12^0 


Anchors Aweigh!: CHAPTER THIRTEEN 137 


TfiS REtl STORM mo-1022) 

TTO IF RND (1) > .S THEN 1030 

T51 VTAB 13: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " STORM-, TAIPAN ! " : 
GOSUB 7fc,0 

1000 IF RND (1) > -2 THEN 1020 

1001 VTAB 14: 

PRINT " ANY PORT IN A STORM, 
GOSUB 7b0: 

PO = INT ( RND (1) * 10) : 

IF PO = L THEN VTAB 14: 

PRINT " tilE CAN’T MAKE IT, 

T AIPAN, ": 

SR = 0: 

GOTO 1010 

1010 VTAB 14: 

PRINT n UlE ' RE HEADED 
FOR SHELTER, ": 

GOSUB 750 

1020 VTAB 14: 

PRINT " UE RODE OUT THE 
STORM, TAIPAN! ": 

GOSUB 7fl0 

1021 IF RND (1) > .5 THEN n0 


1022 GOTO 12T0 




Nicholas lquan 



T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Piratical Princes of the Eastern Seas 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


Piracy is defined as the robbery of ships on the high seas. 

Along the China Coast, the institution of piracy has a long and fasci¬ 
nating history. Almost all Western piracy occurred during its Golden Age 
from the mid-seventeenth century to the mid-eighteenth century, and 
was mainly concentrated in raids against Spanish colonial towns and 
shipping on the Caribbean and Atlantic. In contrast, the tradition of 
piracy on the China Seas has covered a much longer period. The pirates 
of East Asia have operated for over two thousand years in the China 
Seas, especially in the zone from Hainan island to the Formosa Straits. 
(Piracy is still something of a problem around Hongkong, though only a 
part-time occupation of a few mariners.) 

What most distinguished the pirates of the China Coast from the buc¬ 
caneers of the West was their organization and power. Whereas the few 
hundred buccaneers of the Caribbean usually operated lone ships, and 
with frequent mutinies among the pirate crews, the East Asian pirates 
were often organized into massive fleets, with hundreds of thousands of 
men and thousands of pirate craft. 


139 



140 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Without doubt, history's most successful pirate was Kao Hsing-Yeh 
(1624-1662), better known to the English-speaking by the name "Kox- 
inga", to the Spanish as "Cotsen", and to the Japanese as "Kokusen-ya". 
To properly understand Koxinga, we must first understand his father. 

Koxinga's father was born about 1600 in the small village of Anhai, in 
China's Fukien province. A poor tailor by trade, the young man who was 
to become the father of Koxinga headed south from his natal village to 
seek his fortune in the Portuguese colony of Macau, where he arrived in 
1621. There he became a Christian, and was baptized "Gaspar Nicholas". 

In Macau this clever young man became better known as Nicholas 
Iquan. Macau provided the youth with opportunities far beyond those of 
his home village. He learned Portuguese, then the trade language of East 
Asia. Soon, Nicholas was to meet a famous Chinese trader, the so-called 
"Captain China". 

Arriving in 1622 at Captain China's Japanese trading headquarters in 
Hirado, near Nagasaki, Nicholas Iquan went to work for Captain China. 
He quickly learned to speak Japanese. Nicholas married a Japanese 
woman, probably of minor samurai family origin. This woman is known 
to history only by her family name, Tagawa. In 1624, Nicholas Iquan's 
wife bore a son, who was in Japan called Tagawa Fukumatsu, and raised 
him for his first six years in Japan, teaching him the Japanese concepts of 
loyalty and duty. 

Nicholas Iquan was soon deeply involved in the far-flung trade — and 
part-time piracy — of his employer. Captain China himself had been bap¬ 
tized as a Christian, and had escaped from life as a galley slave of the 
Spanish in the Philippines years before. Captain China had built up a 
fleet of hundreds of ships, and competed vigorously with the Dutch in 
the Japan trade, spreading his trading, smuggling and pirating business 
to countries as distant as Vietnam and Cambodia. 

Nicholas Iquan became the most trusted member of Captain China's 
organization, leading trading voyages involving many ships at a time. In 
1624, Nicholas appeared in the Pescadores Islands, in the Formosa Strait, 
and offered his services as translator to the Dutch, who had their local 
base there. 

As Captain China had urged them to do, the Dutch moved their trad¬ 
ing base to Formosa (Taiwan), then a wild and beautiful island inhabited 
almost entirely by primitive native tribesmen. The Dutch encouraged 
Chinese settlers to immigrate to Formosa. Nicholas Iquan, using his posi- 


Piratical Princes of the Eastern Seas: CHAPTER FOURTEEN 141 


tion as a Dutch employee, was able to make a modest extra income from 
bribes paid to him from the settlers. 

Then, in 1625, Captain China died. Nicholas Iquan deserted the 
Dutch, and moved in on the trader's empire. He killed off supporters of 
Captain China's legitimate heirs. In a few months, Nicholas controlled 
the late merchant's four hundred ships. Nicholas Iquan set up his head¬ 
quarters in his home village of Anhai, and divided his fleet into small, 
strategically located forces. 

By 1627, Nicholas Iquan controlled most of the coast of China, and 
sacked both Chinese cities and European ships at will. Ships were 
charged a large annual tribute for safe passage. Portuguese ships were 
fair game to this mighty pirate, and even his former employers, the 
Dutch, were targeted. A Dutch punitive fleet of nine men-of-war was 
sent to destroy his ships at the port of Amoy, but the wily pirate defeated 
them, and the Dutch squadron fled to Java. 

This pirate built a splendid palace for himself at Anhai. His six-year- 
old son was summoned from Japan to learn the family business, and thus 
"Tagawa Fukumatsu" was renamed "Cheng Cheng-kung". Nicholas's 
son became a fine scholar, and enrolled in the Imperial Collegiate School 
at age fifteen. 

Nicholas Iquan surrounded himself with an elite personal guard of 
three hundred tough and loyal black Africans, former slaves who had 
escaped Portuguese bondage in Macau. 

In 1628, the Ming emperor of China had had enough of this nuisance, 
and neatly soled his problem by giving Nicholas Iquan the rank of a man¬ 
darin, and made him Admiral of the Imperial fleet. 

But the Manchus were moving south, bit by bit defeating the weaken¬ 
ing Ming dynasty. In 1644, the desperate Ming gave Nicholas Iquan the 
title, "Count Pacifier of the South", and soon afterward ennobled him as 
a duke. 

Nicholas Iquan was by now joined by his Japanese wife, whom he'd 
not visited for twenty-one years. 

Seeing the fortunes of the Ming declining, Nicholas Iquan became a 
turncoat. With his elite bodyguard of three hundred exotic and strikingly 
uniformed blacks, he went to Foochow in 1646 to negotiate the terms of 
his treason with the advancing Manchus. There he was himself betrayed 
by the Manchus. After a fierce battle in which more than a third of his 



142 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


African soldiers died in his defense, Nicholas Iquan was taken captive. 
He was kept in comfortable house arrest in the Manchu capital of Peking 
until 1661, when he was beheaded. 

Immediately after the surrender of Nicholas Iquan, his wife committed 
suicide rather than collaborate with the Manchus. This act was not only 
considered honorable in the Japanese tradition, but it was respected by 
the Chinese as well. 

Now a young man in his early twenties, Cheng Cheng-kung had loved 
his mother despite their long separation. He burned his scholar's robes, 
vowing to remain loyal to the failing Ming cause. Cheng gathered a small 
guerilla band and fought his way to the coast, enlisting his father's 
former land forces along the way. Within a brief time, he had control of all 
Nicholas Iquan's land and naval forces. By the time he was twenty-two, 
Cheng Cheng-kung was a powerful force on both land and sea, control¬ 
ling the greater part of China's coast and all the China Seas. 

The Ming, being defeated everywhere by the Manchus, created Cheng 
Cheng-kung first an earl, then a marquis, and finally a prince. He 
opposed the Manchus with vigor, yet looted shipping in the old pirate 
fashion all the while. In this period, Cheng Cheng-kung was given the 
honorary name of "Kao Hsing-yeh", which the Dutch have passed on to 
us as "Koxinga". 

Koxinga first centered his activities along the ragged, rugged coasts of 
China's southeastern provinces of Fukien and Kwangtung. His fleets 
were said to be able to cover the sea from horizon to horizon. Koxinga's 
fleets completely dominated the Manchu naval forces, and he carried on 
massive, devastating raids upon Manchu-held coastal cities of central and 
south China. 

These raids were so troublesome, the Manchu emperor actually had 
the whole coastal area of the two ravaged provinces (a shoreline over a 
thousand miles in length) completely evacuated, with the entire popula¬ 
tion moved more than ten miles inland, on just three day's notice. The 
manchus had watchtowers, one hundred soldiers manning each tower, 
set up three miles apart all along the coast. Whole cities, farms, fishing 
villages and ports were burned to the ground. Half of the evacuees died 
of starvation, and many of the others were sold into slavery. Anyone 
found near the coast was promptly beheaded without trial. 

This bizarre and unique solution was enforced for nineteen years, by 
Imperial edict. 


Piratical Princes of the Eastern Seas: CHAPTER FOURTEEN 143 


Koxinga turned in frustration to ousting the Dutch from their base at 
Fort Zeelandia on Formosa, invading the island in force. 

The Dutch were widely known for their tenacity in holding their fac¬ 
tory posts against heavy odds. But the Dutch governor of Formosa, Fred- 
erik Coyett, had not been given the support he'd requested from the 
colonial authorities in Batavia. Though able to hold out for nine bitter and 
hungry months against thirty-to-one odds, Coyett eventually surren¬ 
dered to Koxinga in 1661. Koxinga treated the defeated Dutch with honor 
and mercy, allowing them to withdraw in safety from the island. The eve¬ 
ning of the Dutch surrender, Koxinga pronounced himself King of For¬ 
mosa. 

Only a bit more than two hundred miles south of Formosa lay the Phil¬ 
ippines. There, Chinese residents had for many years undergone perse¬ 
cution and periodic genocide. Koxinga felt protective toward these 
Chinese, and he sent word to the Spanish in Manila that they must either 
pay him tribute, or be invaded. The Spanish refused, and, unfairly 
assuming that all the Chinese living in Manila were conspiring with Kox¬ 
inga, they massacred the local Chinese. This genocidal attack enraged 
the pirate king. Koxinga was planning his conquest of the Philippines 
when he died, maddened by a fever, on July 2, 1662, at the age of thirty- 
seven. 

In 1700, the Manchus, having conquered China, officially praised Kox¬ 
inga, their deceased enemy. Now in the position of an established 
dynasty, the Manchu emperor lauded Koxinga as loyal dynastic defender, 
urging his subjects to follow the pirate's example. In 1875, the Manchus 
actually deified Koxinga as the God of Loyalty and Fidelity! The Japanese 
in 1898 inducted Koxinga as a Shinto god, while using his half-Japanese 
heritage as a pretext for their occupation of Formosa. 

Since the time of Koxinga, piracy has never again been as enormous an 
enterprise. Yet it has persisted, with major surges during times of disrup¬ 
tion. By 1800, it is said that there were two squadrons of pirate ships 
operating off the South China coast, together totaling more than 600 
junks and 60,000 pirates of international origin. The Opium Wars, and 
the disorder caused by them, caused another increase in piracy in the 
1840s. 

In the game of Taipan, piracy as a factor is exaggerated for game pur¬ 
poses. Yet pirates were still a serious consideration in the 1860s. Nearly 
every Chinese or foreign cargo ship plying trade on the China seas car- 



144 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


ried either jingals (swivel-mounted blunderbusses about seven feet long 
and weighing only twelve pounds) or Western cannons, for use against 
pirates. 

Crews carried axes, spears, pistols and rifles with which to repel 
boarders. Bullet-proof shields to protect helmsmen were standard equip¬ 
ment on seagoing junks. Even the great clipper ships would sometimes 
fall prey to oar-driven pirate junks, should they find themselves 
becalmed. 

With the advent of steamships, craft invulnerable to being boarded in 
windless seas, pirates found new ways of preying on shipping. Pirates 
would board a steam vessel in port, disguised as normal paying passen¬ 
gers. When the ship was at sea, and the time seemed ripe, the pirates 
would pull out guns, knives, hatchets and clubs, taking over the bridge 
and the engine room. The passengers, crew and cargo would be robbed, 
rich passengers kidnapped for ransom, and the pirates and their material 
and human booty would disappear overboard into waiting "fishing" 
craft, which had rendezvoused by pre-arrangement. 

In our game of Taipan, we assume that the (fictional) pirate Li Yuen is 
powerful, but not nearly so strong as some of the historic pirates of the 
Orient. Thus he is not able to fully control his competitors in the piracy 
business. Still, a payment of tribute to Li is worthwhile just to keep him 
off our backs, and he may be able to protect us from rival pirate gangs. 




Yamato 









T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Stand by the Swivel Guns! 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


These lines are the Pirates routine: 

10BS REM PIRATES (1030-1261) 

1030 HOME: 

ID = INT ( RND (1) * 2) + 1: 

GOSUB 52^0: 

P = INT ( RND (1) * (dlil / 25) * 2 a (ID * 2)) 
+ INT ( RND (1) * 3) + l: 

HTAB l: 

VTAB 17: 

PRINT P^" PIRATE CRAFT SIGHTED!": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOSUB 1100 


147 



148 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Line 1030 determines how may pirates will be encountered, and 
whether they are part of Li Yuen's fleet or independents. 

(With GOSUB 5290, it also starts the Sea Action subroutines, to make 
the pirates appear on the screen. At the end of the book, we'll cover all of 
the Sea Action subroutines, which have line numbers of from 5000 to 
6360. We'll largely ignore these GOSUBs for the moment.) 

Remember that it's very likely that this line, like those in the Storm 
routine, won't be used at all in any particular voyage, as line 981 may 
have passed it by completely. If we do see pirates, there'll be a 50% 
chance they will be either Li Yuen's gang or independent scoundrels. The 
variable "ID" is used to flag the identity of the pirates: a value of 1 stands 
for independents, and 2 represents Li Yuen's jolly crew. The second part 
of line 1030 is a complicated formula which determines P, the number of 
pirate craft encountered. This number is based upon the size of our ves¬ 
sel (MW, the maximum cargo capacity of the ship), whether or not we've 
met Li Yuen's bully boys (they normally travel in much larger fleets), and 
a random factor. 

The rest of this line simply tells us that we've sighted "P" number of 
pirate ships, and GOSUBs 1100, where the Ship Status subroutine starts. 
Here's the Ship Status subroutine: 

1055 REM SHIP STATUS SUBROUTINE (1100-1110) 

1100 HTAB is 
VTAB lb: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A*:,: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " GUNS: "nGi" REPAIR:"i: 

IF SR < 0 THEN SR = 0 

1110 PRINT INT (SR * 100)=,"/: ": 

PRINT "SHIPS ENCOUNTERED:"^:." ": 



Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 149 


PRINT 

PRINT A$i: 

PRINT A$i: 

RETURN 

This subroutine shows us how the battle, if any, is going for us. We'll 
be calling this subroutine from several points in the Pirates routine. It dis¬ 
plays the number of guns with which our craft is armed, our ship's state 
of repair (which must stay above 10% for us to stay above the surface of 
the deep blue sea), and shows the number of pirate ships encountered at 
any time. 

The variable "SR" is a number which will never be more than 1, and 
keeps track of the state of repair of our ship. Line 1100 makes sure that 
the value of SR never is below zero before being displayed. In line 1110, 
the state of repair is displayed as SR times 100, in order to give us the 
state of repair as a percentage figure. We then RETURN to line 1030. 

The next lines in the Pirate routine are 1040 and 1041: 

1040 IF ID = 1 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " LOOKS LIKE INDEPENDENT PIRATES.": 

G0SUB ?ao 

1041 IF ID <> 1 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " THERE'S "iLY$i"'S BANNER!": 

G0SUB 7fl0 

All we're doing in these lines is displaying the identity of the pirates. 

Line 1050 handles the possibility that we've not only encountered 
independent pirates, but that Li Yuen's fleet has come up and driven off 
the "poachers": 



150 TAI PA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


1050 GOSUB 1100: 

IF ID = 1 AND RND (1) > -55 
THEN VTAB IT: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " "iLYS^'S FLEET DROVE'EM OFF!": 
GOSUB blOO: 

P = P * INT ( RND (1) * 10) + b: 

ID = 2: 

GOSUB 5250: 

GOSUB 1100: 

IF TR = 0 THEN 1070 


When this line operates, independent pirates will be chased away by Li 
Yuen's fleet 5% of the time. But since we'll be looping back to this line 
probably several times during any pirate encounter, there's a real good 
chance that Li Yuen's fleet will appear to banish the interlopers. Notice 
that 1050 sets the number of ships in Li Yuen's fleet as being the integer of 
"RND (1) * 10" multiplied by the number of independent pirates, then 
adds another six. In other words, Li's fleet will be anywhere from one 
times the size of the independent fleet (plus five), to ten times (plus five). 

/ After calling the appropriate subroutine in the Sea Action section of 
the program (GOSUB 6100), line 1050 then gives us a Ship Status update, 
sets the ID flag to 2, to indicate Li Yuen's fleet, and checks whether we're 
"paid up" with Li Yuen's favorite charity. If we're not in good standing 
with Li (TR = 0), we go to line 1070. 

Lines 1060 and 1061 only operate if the pirate fleet encountered is that 
of Li, and we're paid up with that gentleman: 

10b0 IF ID = 2 AND TR = 1 THEN VTAB 15= 

PRINT "THEY GREET US-. AND SAIL OFF- ": 

GOSUB bl00: 

P = 0: 

GOSUB 750: 

IF RND (1) > -A THEN 1030 




Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 151 


10L1 IF ID = 2 AND TR = 1 THEN 1E10 


As we can see, if the pirates on hand are Li's fellows (ID = 2), and 
we've paid tribute recently enough (TR = 1), the pirate fleet departs 
peacefully (P = 0). Then, twenty percent of the time, this line starts look¬ 
ing for the possibility of further pirate troubles, by looping back to 1030. 
If we luck out, however, the program branches from 1061 straight to the 
Arrival routine at 1290. 

The much less pleasant possibility is that we are in bad stead with Li 
Yuen, either by refusing to help him build his temple, or by being so 
unfortunate as to be caught with an "expired" contribution. (How such a 
contribution can expire will be explained when we later cover the Arrival 
routine and the Update subroutine.) For whatever reason, we're in trou¬ 
ble with Li Yuen now. 

Line 1070 shows us that Li's minions, Yamato and Smythe, are less 
than pleased to meet us: 

1070 IF CR = 0 AND TR = 0 

AND ID = S THEN CR = 1: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT 
HTAB 1: 

PRINT " ARE CURSING US! n : 

G0SUB 7fl0 


Note the use of the flag CR, which is used for no other purpose than to 
make certain that a well-worded curse isn't over-used each time the pro¬ 
gram goes past this line. One curse by the likes of Yamato and Smythe is 
enough to last a voyage. 

The following lines demonstrate that Mssrs. Yamato and Smythe are 
capable of more than mere words: 

lOflO VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY'RE FIRING ON US! ": 

G0SUB 53A0 



152 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


lOfll IF INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1 > 

INT ( RND (1) * 5) + 1 THEN GOSUB 5540: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " THE BUGGERS HIT US!": 

SR = SR - C RND (1) / 

(HU / ( INT ( RND (1) * 50) + 1))): 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOSUB 1100: 

GOTO 10^0 

lOflE VTAB n: 

PRINT " HISSED US-. TAIPAN! 

GOSUB 7fi0 

Holey waterline! This is getting serious. These lines handle the gunfire 
of not only Li's fleet, but that of independents, as well. The "IF INT 
( RND (1) * P) + 1 > INT ( RND (1) * 5) + 1 THEN..." part is used as a 
method of making it more likely that a large attacking fleet will hit us 
than would a smaller fleet, during any given salvo. The figure of "5" is 
arbitrary, arrived at through trial and error, as a reasonable factor to help 
give us the accuracy of the attackers. An attacking force of more than five 
will usually hit us during a salvo, and a smaller force will usually miss us. 

Next, line 1081 determines the damage done if we're hit. SR, we'll 
recall, represents the state of repair of our ship. When we leave port, this 
figure is 1, and any damage done to our ship makes SR a decimal frac¬ 
tion. Damage is computed in line 1081 by subtracting a decimal fraction 
from SR. The fraction to be subtracted from our ship's state of repair is 
determined by first dividing the figure MW (the maximum capacity, or 
size, of our ship) by an integer between one and fifty. After this first divi¬ 
sion is made the resulting figure is used to divide "RND (1)" (a random 
fraction), and the result of that division gives us a fraction (usually a small 
one), which is subtracted from our state of repair, to give us a smaller 
value for SR. 


Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 153 


The purpose of this fairly complex formula is simply to assure that if 
we have a large ship, we're likely to be less damaged by a single salvo 
than would a smaller ship. 

After the damage is computed, line 1081 then GOSUBs 1100 to display 
the new Ship Status. But if the pirate salvo missed us, that delightful 
information is supplied to us instead by line 1082. 

Now come even more ominous program lines: 


101D IF SR < .1 THEN GOSUB 7AQ: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " WE’RE GOING UNDER-, TAIPAN! 
GOSUB H21Q: 

X$ = 

GOTO 1300 

1011 GOTO 1120 


These are lines we promised to cover later, back when we went 
through the Storm routine. Before we went to line 1090 from the Storm 
routine, we'd set SR to 0. 

For whatever reason our ship is now sinking, we'll always make an 
extended visit to Davy Jones' Locker Club if our state of repair (SR) is less 
than .1 (10% state of repair when displayed on the screen by the Ship Sta¬ 
tus subroutine). 

X$ is made to hold a null string (nothing), in order that the That's All 
Folks routine starting at 1300 will never see it holding an "R", which 
would have been the case if we'd pressed "R" for Retire to reach 1300 
from the Market routine. (We don't want to be given a chance to continue 
where we "left off", if we're really supposed to be goners!) 

If we didn't sink this time, we move along to lines 1120, 1121, 1122 and 
1123: 



154 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


USD VTAB IT: 

PRINT " SHALL WE R)UNn F)IGHTn OR P)ARLEY?": 

GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = "R" THEN X = 1 

11S1 IF X$ = "F" THEN X = S 

USE IF X$ = "P" THEN X = 3 

1123 IF X$ <> "R" AND X$ <> "F" AND X$ <> "P" 

THEN GOSUB 77D: 

GOTO USD 

At last, we'll get to do something about these dratted pirates! 

After line 1120 asks us whether we wanted to Run, Fight or Parley, we 
are left with the value of 1, 2, or 3 in the flag X. 

Line 1130 routes the program flow to the appropriate lines: 

1130 ON X GOTO 1140 t llbOi1ED0 

If our choice was to Run, the value of variable X would be 1, and we'd 
GOTO line 1140: 

HMD IF SR < = RND (1) AND INT ( RND (1) * b) + 1 

< = INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1 THEN USD 

1141 IF SR > RND (1) AND INT ( RND (1) * b) + 1 

> INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1 THEN 1143 

114E GOTO USD 

1143 GOSUB bEEO: 

VTAB Ifl: 

PRINT " WE ESCAPED FR0H ’EH TAIPAN! 



Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 155 


P = 0: 

GOSUB ?flO: 

GOSUB HDD: 

IF RND (1) > -fl THEN 1D3D 
1144 GOTO 1250 


The variable SR, of course, is the state of repair of our ship. It is always 
zero and one, inclusively, and it indicates the general condition of our 
vessel. Line 1140 first takes SR and compares it to a random fraction. If SR 
is less than or equal to RND (1), and RND (1) * 6 (plus one) is also less 
than or equal to RND (1) * P (plus one), then we haven't escaped the 
pirates this round ("THEN 1150"). More simply put: there are two factors 
which increase the player's chances of getting away from the pirates: a 
high state of repair (SR), and a low number of pirates (P). 

If we've escaped, we're routed to line 1143, where a message to this 
effect is displayed. The number of pirates is reduced to zero (P = 0), and 
the Ship Status subroutine is run ("GOSUB 1100"). But there's always a 
chance that we'll see more "sea trouble", so two times out of ten, we'll be 
routed back to 1030, where we'll have another chance to get wiped out. If 
there is not further chance of storm or pirates, line 1144 routes us to the 
Arrival routine (1290), and we're home free, filled with noble sentiments 
about discretion and valor. 

But if we haven't been able to run away from all of the pirate ships, 
lines 1150 and 1151 handle the other two options: 

1150 IF SR > RND (1) AND RND (1) > . t, THEN 

P = P - INT ( INT (( RND (1) * P) + 1) / 2): 

GOSUB 1)220: 

GOSUB 5250: 

VTAB 15: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT Pi" OF 'EH STILL WITH US! 


GOSUB 760: 
GOSUB 1100: 
GOTO 1050 



156 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


1151 VTAB 15: 

PRINT " CAN’T SHAKE ’EH! 


GOSUB 7fiQ: 
GOTO 1050: 


These lines take care of either the possibility that we got away from part 
of the pirates (line 1150), or that we couldn't lose any of them (line 1151). 
The complicated first part of line 1150 bases our chances of escaping some 
of the pirate fleet partially upon our state of repair. And the number of 
pirate ships still with us, should we be so lucky, is set to be at least half 
the original number. Like many of the routines in Taipan, we here have to 
carefully balance ease versus difficulty. The chance of losing the pirates 
on any one run-through is very low. But we'll be going through these 
lines as long as our ship is afloat, and still trying to escape. So we want 
the chance of escape to be quite low each time these lines are run. 

Here are the lines we've waded through in this chapter: 

1025 REN PIRATES (1030-1261) 

1030 HOME: 

ID = INT ( RND (1) * 2) + l: 

GOSUB 5250: 

P = INT ( RND (1) * (HU / 25) * 2 a (ID * 2)) 

+ INT ( RND (1) * 3) + l: 

HTAB l: 

VTAB 17: 

PRINT Pi" PIRATE CRAFT SIGHTED!": 

GOSUB 760: 

GOSUB 1100 

1040 IF ID = 1 THEN VTAB 15: 


Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 157 


PRINT " LOOKS LIKE INDEPENDENT PIRATES-": 
GOSUB 7A0 

1041 IF ID <> 1 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$=,: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " THERE'S "iLV$i"'S BANNER!": 

GOSUB 760 

1050 GOSUB 1100: 

IF ID = 1 AND RND (1) > -IS 
THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " "nLY$i"'S FLEET DROVE'EII OFF!": 
GOSUB blOO: 

P = P * INT ( RND (1) * 10) + b: 

ID = E: 

GOSUB 5E10: 

GOSUB 1100: 

IF TR = 0 THEN 1070 

lObO IF ID = E AND TR = 1 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT "THEY GREET US-, AND SAIL OFF- ": 
GOSUB blOO: 

P = 0: 

GOSUB 7AD: 

IF RND (1) > -fl THEN 1030 


10bl IF ID = E AND TR = 1 THEN 1E10 



158 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


107D IF CR = 0 AND TR = 0 

AND ID = 5 THEN CR = 1: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT B*i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " "=,YS$i" ARE CURSING US!": 

GOSUB 7flD 

lUflO VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY’RE FIRING ON US! 

GOSUB 5360 

lOfil IF INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1 > 

INT ( RND (1) * 5) + 1 THEN GOSUB 5540 
VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT " THE BUGGERS HIT US!": 

SR = SR - ( RND (1) / 

(Mill / ( INT ( RND (1) * 50) + 1) ) ) : 
GOSUB 7flO: 

GOSUB 1100: 

GOTO 10*10 

1085 VTAB 11: 

PRINT " MISSED US-, TAIPAN! 

GOSUB 7fl0 

10*10 IF SR < .1 THEN GOSUB 7A0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " WE'RE GOING UNDER-, TAIPAN! 
GOSUB hBIO: 

X$ = "": 

GOTO 1300 



Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 159 


Itm GOTO 1120 

1015 REM SHIP STATUS SUBROUTINE (1100-1110) 

1100 HTAB l: 

VTAB lb: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT " GUNS: "iGi" REPAIR: 0 '-,: 

IF SR < 0 THEN SR = 0 

1110 PRINT INT (SR * 100)i"* 

PRINT "SHIPS ENCOUNTERED:°iPi" °: 

PRINT A$i: 

PRINT A$i: 

PRINT A$i: 

RETURN 

1120 VTAB IT. 

PRINT ° SHALL UE R)UN-, F) IGHT OR P)ARLEY?°: 
GOSUB bO: 

IF X$ = "R" THEN X = 1 

1121 IF X$ = "F" THEN X = 2 

1122 IF X$ = "P" THEN X = 3 

1123 IF X$ <> "R" AND X$ <> "F" AND X$ <> "P" 

THEN GOSUB 770: 

GOTO 1120 

1130 ON X GOTO im01llb011200 



160 TAI PA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


imo IF SR < = RND (1) AND INT ( RND (1) * b) + 1 

< = INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1 THEN 1150 

1141 IF SR > RND (1) AND INT ( RND (1) * b) + 1 

> INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1 THEN 1143 

114E GOTO 1150 

1143 GOSUB bEEO: 

VTAB Ifi: 

PRINT " UE ESCAPED FROM 'EM TAIPAN! 

P = 0: 

GOSUB 7fl0= 

GOSUB 1100: 

IF RND (1) > -fi THEN 1030 

1144 GOTO lETO 

1150 IF SR > RND (1) AND RND (1) > -b THEN 

P = P - INT ( INT (( RND (1) * P) + 1) / 3): 
GOSUB bEEO: 

GOSUB SETO: 

VTAB 11: 

HTAB 1: 

PRINT Pi" OF 'EM STILL WITH US! 

n . 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOSUB 1100: 

GOTO 1050 




Stand by the Swivel Guns!: CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


1151 VTAB n: 

PRINT " CAN 

n ■ 

GOSUB 7fl0: 
GOTO 1Q5Q: 


•T SHAKE 'EM! 




Koxinga 




T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


More Pirates 

CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


The "Run" choice sends us to lines 1160 and 1161: 
llbO VTAB 1R: 

PRINT " UE'RE FIRING ON 'EM! 

GOSUB 5540: 

IF INT ( RND (1) * (G + 1)) + 1 > INT (RND (1) * 
4) 

THEN VTAB 1R: 

PRINT B^i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT "HIT 'EM!": 

GOSUB 5t>fl0: 

GOTO 1170 


163 



164 


TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


llbl VTAB 11: 

PRINT " HISSED 'EM! ": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOTO 1110 

Here the factor which tunes the accuracy of our shots at the pirates is 
the number of guns we have. The more guns, the more likely we are to hit 
pirates. 

The next lines determine the effect of our hits on the pirates: 


1170 

NK 

= RND (1) : 







IF 

NK > .4 THEN IF P > = G 

THEN 






X = 

: INT ( INT (( RND (1) * 

(G - 

1) ) 

+ 1) 

/ 3) 

+ 1 

1171 

IF 

NK > .4 AND P < G THEN 

X = 

INT 

( RND 

(1) 

* P) 


+ 1 


1172 IF NK < = .4 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY'RE STILL AFLOAT.": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOTO HID 

Line 1170 sets a value to variable "NK", which will, with other factors, 
determine the effect of our guns: a value of more than .4 is needed for any 
pirate craft to be sunk. If none were, line 1172 operates, and we're given 
the display which tells us we haven't sunk any ships. Otherwise lines 
1170 and 1171 have to figure out how many pirate craft we've sunk. They 
do this by first figuring if there are at least as many pirate ships as we 
have guns (. . . IFP > = G THEN X = INT (INT (( RND (1) * (G -1))+ 1) / 
3) + l . . .). If there are pirate ships in numbers greater than or equal to 
the number of guns we have, then, clearly, we can't possibly sink them 
all with one salvo. This portion of line 1170 sets X to the number actually 
sunk by our fire. 

If there are less than one pirate craft for each of our guns, line 1171 sets 
X to a random number between one and the total number of pirate ships 
(. . . X = INT (RND (1) * P) + l . . .). 


More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 165 


The victims of our blazing gunfire are noted and subtracted from the 
total number of pirate ships in 1180: 

1130 P = P - X: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " SANK "iXi" OF 'EM-, TAIPAN!": 

GOSUB 5A30: 

IF P > 0 THEN GOSUB 521D 


We must now determine whether there are any pirate vessels left. 
Lines 1190 through 1193 do this for us: 

1110 GOSUB 1100: 

IF P = 0 THEN IF RND (1) > .5 THEN 1270 

1111 IF P = 0 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THAT'S ALL FOR THE BUGGERS!": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

IF RND (1) > -fl THEN 1030 

1112 IF P = 0 THEN 1210 


1113 GOSUB 7fl0: 
GOTO 10S0 


The first thing line 1190 does is to have the Ship Status subroutine 
(1100) update the screen. 

There is now a fifty-fifty chance that the program will go to 1270, 
where the Capture routine is located. (This Capture routine, which we'll 
describe soon, allows us to take control of a larger ship.) If no pirate ship 
is captured, a display in line 1191 tells the player that the pirates are done 
for. Then there is a one-out-of-five chance that line 1191 recycles us to 
1030 for more pirates. Otherwise, line 1192 sends us directly to the Arrival 
routine at 1290. 



166 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


If we haven't defeated the pirates at all, line 1193 has us go back to 1050 
to continue our confrontation. 

Supposing we'd made a choice to Parley with the pirates, we'd be sent 
by line 1130 to line 1200: 

1200 IF RND (1) < -fl THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " THEY REFUSE TO PARLEY-, TAIPAN- 
G0SUB 760: 

GOTO 1050 

1201 VTAB 13: 

PRINT " THEY AGREE TO DISCUSS TERMS- ": 

G0SUB 7fl0 

Each time we try to parley, there's about an 80% chance that the pirates 
will have none of it, and they'll get a free shot at us in the bargain, when 
we GOTO 1050. If they do agree to talk (line 1201), we continue to line 1210: 

1210 IF P > G / 2 OR RND (1) > -7 THEN VTAB 13: 

PRINT " THEY OFFER TO LET US GO IN EXCHANGE FOR"i: 
PRINT "ALL OUR CASH- DO UE ACCEPT-, TAIPAN (Y/N)"i : 
GOTO 1220 

1211 GOTO 1240 


Such a deal! Of course, the player must decide if this is an offer that can 
be refused. If we have almost all our money invested in trade goods, 
"your money or your life" may sound pretty attractive. But if we're dead¬ 
heading it back from Shanghai with an empty hold and three million in 
cash from a big opium sale, we'd be a bit less interested — we might want 
to put our lives on the line to protect that money. 


More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 167 


The following lines process the player's decision: 

1EE0 GOSUB t.0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT A$n : 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB Ifl: 

IF X$ = "V" THEN IF RND (1) > -2 AND 
C> 100 + INT ( RND (1) * 2000) THEN P = 0: 
C = 0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY TOOK IT & RAN!": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOSUB 1100: 

GOTO isao 

1EE1 IF X$ <> "Y" THEN 1050 

IEEE C = 0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY STILL INTEND TO FIGHT!": 
PRINT: 

PRINT A$i: 

GOSUB 7fl0 


The first thing line 1220 does is to GOSUB 60, which gives us either a 
"Y" held in X$, or any other keyboard character. For a simple decision 
like this, we'll just consider anything but a "Y" to be a negative reply. But 
simple though the decision may be, the handling is a bit complex. 

To make the game more like the real world, it's best that the result of giv¬ 
ing in to the pirates' demands not be certain. These lines make it uncer- 



168 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


tain by first giving about a 20% chance that the pirates will take our 
money and s till continue attacking, then by checking whether our cash is 
greater than an arbitrary random figure between 100 and 2100. Thus, if 
the cash we offer the pirates for our safety is less than that random fig¬ 
ure, once again we'll continue to suffer the pirate attack. The amount of 
money the pirates will consider enough will vary from time to time. The 
pirates may consider our cash insufficient funds and refuse to leave us 
alone. But they'll keep our money even while continuing their attack. 

If the pirates consider our cash fair pay for the work they've done, line 
1 22 0 will GOTO 1280, at the end of the Pirate routine, and we're left 
poorer but safer. 

In two cases we'll get to line 1230: if we refused to fork over our money, 
or if they took it and want our hides, as well. 

1230 GOSUB 7fl0: 

GOTO 1050 


All this line does is to give a delay (GOSUB 780) to allow us to read the 
last message, and route us back to the midst of battle, at 1050. 

If there are less pirate vessels than the number of our guns divided by 
two, and the "RND (1) > .7" part of line 1210 is "false", then the pirates 
will try to give up: 

1240 VTAB l: 

HTAB 13: 

PRINT SFL$ i: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT " THEY OFFER TO SURRENDER. ": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

VTAB 15: 

PRINT " DO li)E LET THEM GIVE UP (Y/N)? ": 

GOSUB L0: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN 12L0 


Now we have a choice of continuing the battle, or allowing the pirates 
to surrender. The last part of line 240 routes us to line 1260 if we accept 



More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 169 


the surrender, otherwise (if we didn't accept the surrender) the program 
flow falls through to line 1250, where there's a chance that a number of 
pirate vessels will run off: 


1250 IF RND (1) > 
THEN E = INT 
P = P - E: 
GOSUB blOO: 
VTAB 15: 
PRINT B$i: 
HTAB l: 

PRINT Ei" OF 
GOSUB 7fi0: 
GOSUB 1100: 
GOSUB 5250: 
GOTO 1050 


•5 AND P > 0 
( RND (1) * P) + l: 


’EM RAN AWAY!": 


This line will half the time allow a number between one and all of the 
pirate ships to flee, and will use the temporary variable E to indicate how 
many got away. If one or more got away, we go back to line 1050 for 
another cycle through the battle routine. If none escaped, we fall through 
to line 1260: 

12b0 IF RND (1) > .7 THEN VTAB 15: 

PRINT " THEY'RE PREPARING TO ATTACK! ": 

GOSUB 750: 

GOTO 1050 


So, even if the pirates have asked to surrender, and we've accepted 
their offer, they might attack anyway. What we're trying to do here is to 
account for some of the rich mixture of happenings which are found in 
the real world of human beings. Nothing is certain when we're dealing 
with people and the authors have designed Taipan with this in mind. If 
the pirates betray us by attacking now, the program goes back to 1050 to 
continue the carnage. 



170 TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


If the pirates are sincere in their surrender, the next line allows us to 
take control of a captured ship, superior in size and armament to our 
own: 

12U5 REN CAPTURE (1270-1251) 

1270 VTAB n: 

PRINT n WE'VE CAPTURED A BIGGER SHIP!": 

GOSUB 7b0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " WE'RE TRANSFERRING TO IT NOW-": 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

G = G + INT ( RND (1) * (G + 1)) + 1= 

E = SH + INT ( RND (1) * (SH + ISO)) + 1: 

SH = SH + E: 

NW = HW + E: 

P = 0 

The number of guns (G) we'll have on the new ship is determined by 
"G = G + INT ( RND (1) * (G +1)) +1", which gives us at least one more 
than the number we had before, and as many as twice-plus-one the num¬ 
ber we had previously. The total cargo capacity of our ship's hold (SH) is 
increased by the statements, "E = SH + INT (RND (1) * (SH 4-150)) +1 
and "SH = SH + E", which make the available capacity of our new ship's 
hold at least as large as our old one (plus one unit), and possibly as large 
as double the original (plus one hundred and fifty units). 
"MW = MW + E" adds the same increase on to the total capacity of our 
hold (MW). 

The next lines decide whether we've got more combat, we're being 
sunk, or we're finally free of pirates and ready to enter port: 

1260 IF SR < -1 THEN 1300 


12fll IF P > 0 THEN 1050 


More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 171 


Line 1280 checks if we have a state of repair (SR) of less than a tenth (or 
10%). If that's true, it gets rid of our sinking hulk by hurling us into the 
maelstrom of the That's All Folks routine at line 1300. Line 1281 simply 
checks whether or not there are any pirate vessels left. If there are, we 
must once again recycle through the combat routine, starting again at 
line 1050. 

If neither of these conditions are true, we fall through to line 1290, the 
Arrival routine, which is the last part of the Voyage routine: 

12B5 REM ARRIVAL (1250) 

1250 CR = 0: 

SR = l: 

L = P0: 

V(L) = V(L) + l: 

B = 0: 

K = 0: 

G0SUB IbO: 

HOME: 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$i: 

NORMAL: 

PRINT n ARRIVING iL*(L)i" AFTER": 

PRINT " A VOYAGE OF "iET’-i" DAYS-": 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

G0SUB 7fl0: 

HOME: 

GOTO 120 



172 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


A whole slew of things have to be done at this point. First, CR, the flag 
which indicates whether Yamato and Smythe have cursed us this time at 
sea, is reset to zero. Next, SR is set to one, to indicate that any damage to 
our ship is now repaired. L, the identity of the port we're visiting, is 
made to equal PO, our chosen port o' call. (Of course, if a storm forced us 
into a port for shelter, we didn't actually choose the value in PO. 

Next, the number of times we've visited the port we're entering is 
incremented by adding one to V(L). (Remember? We use the V(L) array in 
the Records subroutine.) 

The flag B, which indicates whether we've already borrowed from 
Elder Brother Wu during our present time in port, is reset to zero, to 
show we haven't done so. (This would only be important if we're in 
Hongkong.) Yet another flag, K, is reset to zero to show that the Events 
routine has not yet been run through for this port. (We'll discuss that rou¬ 
tine in a separate chapter.) 

Line 1290 next GOSUBs 160. Lines 160 to 172 are the Update subrou¬ 
tine. Since they need to be explained now, here they are: 

1SS REM UPDATE SUBROUTINE (lbO-172) 

IbO ET = INT (ET + (ET * RND (1) / 3)): 

GT = GT + ET: 

D = D + INT (D * (ET / 3b0)) : 

JD = JD + ET: 

IF JD > 3L0 THEN JD = JD - 3b0: 

Y = Y + 1 

Ibl IF JD < 1 THEN JD = 1 

170 PI = INT ( (JD - 30) / 30) : 

DA = INT ((((JD / 30) - INT (JD / 30))) * 30): 

IF RND (1) > -TS THEN TR = 0 


171 IF H < 0 THEN (1 = 0 



More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 173 


175 RETURN 

Except for the tail-end of this subroutine, all it does is calculate the date 
after an ocean voyage, by adding ET (the elapsed time of the voyage in 
days) to the date, and make any needed adjustments to the day of the 
month (D), the month of the year (M), and the year (Y). While doing 
these things, this monster also adds ET to GT (the game time, used in fig¬ 
uring a score). JD is used to help calculate the month and year, and can be 
thought of as the "Julian date" — the number of days elapsed within a 
particular year. 

The end of line 170 will set the flag TR to zero at the end of five out of 
one hundred voyages. The effect of this is that Li Yuen will then consider 
that another payment is due — and we won't be under his "protection" 
until he's paid again. 

RETURNing to line 1290, we next display information showing where 
we've arrived and how long it took us to get there. The Delay subroutine 
is called in order to give us time to read the message, and we GOTO line 
120, where our activities in the new port o' call can start. 

Before going on, let's look at the lines we've covered together in this 
chapter: 

1SS REM UPDATE SUBROUTINE (lt.0-175) 

IbO ET = INT (ET + (ET * RND (1) / 3)): 

GT = GT + ET: 

D = D + INT (D * (ET / 3b0) ) : 

JD = JD + ET: 

IF JD > 3L0 THEN JD = JD - 3fc.Q: 

V = Y + 1 

Ibl IF JD < 1 THEN JD = 1 

170 M = INT ((JD - 30) / 30): 

DA = INT ((((JD / 30) - INT (JD / 30))) * 30): 

IF RND (1) > -T5 THEN TR = 0 



174 


TAI PAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


171 IF n < D THEN II = Q 

172 RETURN 
11LU VTAB n: 

PRINT " WE'RE FIRING ON 'EM! 

GOSUB 5540: 

IF INT ( RND (1) * (G + 1)) + 1 > INT (RND (1) 
* 4 ) 

THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$i: 

HTAB l: 

PRINT "HIT 'EM!": 

GOSUB SbflO: 

GOTO 1170 

llbl VTAB 11: 

PRINT " HISSED 'EM! 

GOSUB 7fiD: 

GOTO HID 

1170 NK = RND (1): 

IF NK > .4 THEN IF P > = G THEN 

X = INT ( INT (( RND (1) * (G - 1)) + 1) / 3) + 
1 

1171 IF NK > .4 AND P < G THEN X = INT ( RND (1) * 
P) + 1 

1172 IF NK < = .4 THEN VTAB M: 

PRINT " THEY'RE STILL AFLOAT.": 

GOSUB 760: 

GOTO ino 



More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 175 


HAD P = P - X: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " SANK "=,Xi" OF 'EM-. TAIPAN!": 

GOSUB 5630: 

IF P > 0 THEN GOSUB 5210 

1110 GOSUB 1100: 

IF P = 0 THEN IF RND (1) > -5 THEN 1270 

1111 IF P = 0 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THAT’S ALL FOR THE BUGGERS!": 

GOSUB 760: 

IF RND (1) > -6 THEN 1030 

1112 IF P = 0 THEN 1210 

1113 GOSUB 760: 

GOTO 1050 

1200 IF RND (1) < -6 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY REFUSE TO PARLEY-. TAIPAN- ": 

GOSUB 780: 

GOTO 1050 

1201 VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY AGREE TO DISCUSS TERMS- ": 

GOSUB 780 

1210 IF P > G / 2 OR RND (1) > -7 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY OFFER TO LET US GO IN EXCHANGE 
FOR" i : 

PRINT "ALL OUR CASH- DO UE ACCEPT-. TAIPAN (Y/ 
N)"i : 

GOTO 1220 



176 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


1211 GOTO 1240 

1220 GOSUB tiO: 

VTAB n: 

PRINT A$i: 

PRINT A$i: 

VTAB Ifi: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN IF RND (1) > -2 AND 
C> 100 + INT ( RND (1) * 2000) THEN P 
C = 0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY TOOK IT & RAN!": 

GOSUB 7A0: 

GOSUB 1100: 

GOTO 12A0 

1221 IF X$ <> "Y" THEN 1050 

1222 C = 0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY STILL INTEND TO FIGHT!": 
PRINT: 

PRINT A$i: 

GOSUB 7fl0 

1230 GOSUB 7A0: 

GOTO 1050 

1240 VTAB l: 

HTAB 13: 



More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 177 


PRINT SFL$t: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY OFFER TO SURRENDER. 

GOSUB 7fl0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " DO UJE LET THEN GIVE UP (Y/N)f> 
GOSUB fc.0: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN 12b0 

1250 IF RND (1) > .5 AND P > 0 

THEN E = INT ( RND (1) * P) + 1= 

P = P - E: 

GOSUB blOO: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT B$i : 

HTAB l: 

PRINT E'-." OF 'EM RAN AliJAY!": 

GOSUB 7fi0: 

GOSUB HDD: 

GOSUB 5210: 

GOTO 1DSD 

lEbO IF RND (1) > -7 THEN VTAB 11: 

PRINT " THEY'RE PREPARING TO ATTACK! 
GOSUB 760: 

GOTO 1050 


12b5 REN 


CAPTURE (1270-1251) 



178 


TAIPAN: A.Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


1270 VTAB 11: 

PRINT " WE'VE CAPTURED A BIGGER SHIP!" 
GOSUB 7G0: 

VTAB 11: 

PRINT " WE'RE TRANSFERRING TO IT NOW." 
GOSUB 7fi0: 

G = G + INT ( RND (1) * (G + 1)) + 1: 

E = SH + INT ( RND (1) * (SH + ISO)) + 
SH = SH + E: 

MW = MW + E: 

P = 0 

1260 IF SR < .1 THEN 1300 

12fil IF P > 0 THEN 1050 

12fiS RE(1 ARRIVAL (1210) 

1210 CR = 0: 

SR = l: 

L = PO: 

V(L) = V(L) + l: 

B = 0: 

K = 0: 

GOSUB IbO: 

HONE: 

PRINT: 

INVERSE: 

PRINT A**: 

NORMAL: 



More Pirates: CHAPTER SIXTEEN 179 


PRINT " ARRIVING AFTER": 

PRINT " A VOYAGE OF "^ETi" DAYS-": 
INVERSE: 

PRINT A$: 

NORMAL: 

GOSUB 7S0: 

HOME: 

GOTO 120 




Lorcha 



T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Ships of the China Coast 

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


The last thing the Arrival routine did was to take the program all the way 
back to the Main Display routine, which begins at line 120. 

Line 120, we'll recall, was simple: 

120 GOSUB 130: 

GOTO 220 


With “GOSUB 130", the Main Display information is displayed. Then 
we GOTO 220, where the Market Prices are displayed. 

But the first thing that line 220 does is to GOSUB 790. Remember 
when, many chapters ago, we said we'd get to the Events subroutine 
later? Well, it's later now. 

The Events subroutine is where the occasional happenings of the game 
are handled. 

The first lines of the Events subroutine allow the player to “trade up" 
to a larger ship. 


181 



182 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


But what type of ships did the taipans — and the East Asian pirates — 
use? What actual craft might correspond to the 50-unit ship with which a 
player starts a game? 

One book which the Authors came across in our research, is a large, 
beautifully illustrated work, purporting to be about "ships". Looking in 
the index, we found but one reference to "junks". We looked at the 
proper page, and found a definition something like this: "Junks are Chi¬ 
nese boats." That book had very little else to say about junks, though 
every conceivable type of Western craft was treated in detail. This was 
worse than a disappointingly brief treatment of junks — it was inaccu¬ 
rate: junks are Chinese ships, not boats. Any good sailor knows a boat is a 
craft which is small enough to be placed aboard a ship. Sampans are Chi¬ 
nese boats, while junks are seagoing or riverine ships. Perhaps the 
Authors should not have been surprised at the apparent ignorance of 
those who'd written that book about ships. After all, hardly anything 
about the largest nation on this planet is taken seriously by most West¬ 
erners. Junks are only one example. 

The sampan (from the Chinese san pan, literally "three boards") is 
known to have existed for over three thousand years. The Shang dynasty 
(1766-1122 BC) had an ideograph for "boat", which was a simplified pic¬ 
ture of a sampan. These craft still can be found in Hongkong's Aberdeen 
harbor, propelled efficiently by stern sweeps. A more modern form of 
sampan is Hongkong's "walla-walla boat", which uses a hull similar to a 
Western ship's gig. Also known as "Hongkong sampans", these little 
craft have been used continuously since the earliest days of the Crown 
Colony. 

(One of the Authors was a young U.S. Navy sailor in the mid-1960s. 
One night while on a rare overnight liberty in the Crown Colony, he had 

— with the aid of several iron-gutted British swabs from the Singapore- 
based submarine. Anchorite — nearly drunk Kowloon dry. Returning to 
Hongkong island so late that the ferries had stopped operating, he can 
even now remember stepping into a motorized walla-walla boat. But he 
has no memory of crossing the harbor — or anything else, for that matter 

— until he awoke the next morning in his bed at the Ascot Hotel.) 

Junks themselves are of uncertain age, but have been around as ocean¬ 
going vessels at least from the time of the T'ang dynasty (618-916 AD). 
While the Western world had fallen into feudalism and ignorance, Chi¬ 
na's T'ang empire was an enlightened civilization, with junks trading by 
sea throughout East Asia. 



Ships of the China Coast: CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 183 


The Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1260-1367) had huge junks longer than 
one hundred feet. These, along with Korean ships, were used by Kublai 
Khan's forces in their invasion of Japan. (The word Kamikaze, Japanese for 
"Divine Wind", originated when a terrible typhoon — said to have been 
called up by the Japanese Buddhist priest Nichiren — sank most of these 
ships, saving Japan from the Mongols.) 

By the early 1400s, Chinese junk fleets were trading and exploring as 
far away from their homeland as India, Arabia and Africa. 

Many maritime writers dismiss junks as "boats", and treat them con¬ 
temptuously. (Even the English word for them — junk — suggests this 
contempt.) But G. R. G. Worchester, a British authority on the craft, 
wrote in his fascinating book. Sail and Sweep in China, that Chinese junks 
were probably at least equal to, if not better than, anything on the Earth's 
seas up until about four hundred years ago. 

Junks were built with watertight compartments and with rudders 
which could be lifted in shallow water. Many could carry two or three 
hundred tons of cargo, yet were built so they could navigate in only three 
feet of water. 

But the Chinese were very conservative in their naval architecture (as 
with everything else). Once "perfected" the design of junks remained 
completely unchanged for centuries. Junks are still economically impor¬ 
tant along the China coast and on China's vast inland waterway system. 

When the Portuguese established themselves in Macau in the mid- 
1500s, they were confronted with local pirates. Since Chinese admirals of 
that time would rarely risk themselves against pirates, the Chinese relied 
upon the Portuguese to combat the sea-rovers. The Portuguese and the 
Chinese shipwrights of Macau, probably over a period of many years, 
developed a hybrid type of ship, half Western and half Chinese: the 
lorcha. 

Lorchas were rigged with Chinese-style sails and Western-style hulls. 
These beautiful and hard-working little ships were faster and could haul 
more cargo than a junk of similar size, carrying anywhere from 40 to 300 
tons of cargo. 

Around the beginning of the 1800s, the Chinese arranged with the Por¬ 
tuguese to create a joint anti-pirate fleet, consisting of sixty Imperial Chi¬ 
nese war junks and six Portuguese lorchas. This fleet was to patrol the 
mouth of the Pearl river and to suppress piracy. Soon most of Imperial 



184 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


junks had actually joined the pirates. But those six tough little lorchas 
defeated the pirates on their own! 

The taipans of Hongkong used lorchas for carrying opium and other 
goods in their trading and smuggling operations along the China coast. 
The craft were ideal ships for rendezvousing with huge warehouse-like 
receiving ships hidden in isolated inlets along the coast. From these 
barges, fast oar-driven "dragon boats" could race the opium to shore 
with little fear of interception by Chinese authorities. After the Yangtze 
river was opened to foreigners in 1861, the versatile lorchas carried cargo 
as far as 600 miles up that river. 

The lorcha is the only type of ship to have a war named after one of its 
kind. In 1856, the lorcha Arrow (which the British claimed was of 
Hongkong registry), was seized by the Chinese. When the British com¬ 
menced military retaliations, the result was called "The Arrow War". 

The last of the lorchas disappeared, Worchester suggests, during the 
Second World War. They were filled with rock and were sunk across the 
Yangtze river at Matung, to prevent the Japanese from using the river. 

Since the lorchas were so effective against the pirates of the China 
Seas, it stands to reason that the pirates themselves used some other 
type of craft. The authors have come across references to pirates mas¬ 
querading as fishermen, so it seems certain that almost all of the pirate 
craft were junks. The crews of pirate junks would pile fishing nets, cov¬ 
ered with thick leather, along the sides of the craft as an effective bullet¬ 
stopping barrier. The pirate junks were mainly the types of craft which 
were used along Fukien and Kwantung provinces. These ships were of 
deeper draft, and more seaworthy, than the junks of China's northern 
climes. (The northern junks were built flat-bottomed in order to navigate 
shallow waters common to northern ports and rivers.) 

Although the graphics show no fine detail, you may like to know that 
the pirate ships depicted by the routines in the "Sea Action" section of 
this book represent large sea-going junks of Kwantung province. 

The larger ships used by the China Transfer were European and Amer¬ 
ican sailing and steam craft. These ranged from little two-masted fore- 
and-aft rigged schooners, through grimly and ugly — but reliable — 
seagoing steamships, to the culmination of the Age of Sail, the magnifi¬ 
cent China Clippers. 



Ships of the China Coast: CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 185 


The clippers could, if the winds were fair, outrace any steamship of the 
time. Tea clippers would carry nothing but tea, to prevent the odors of 
other items from spoiling the delicate flavor of their precious cargo. 
Opium clippers would speed their destructive cargo from Calcutta to 
Hongkong, for distribution by lorchas to receiving ships along the China 
coast. 

But neither the beauty of the clippers, nor (in favorable winds) their 
high speed, could save them from decline. The fact remained that winds 
were not always favorable. It was also expensive to pay for the large crews 
needed to handle the intricate sails of the clippers. (Some sea captains 
would simply kidnap — "Shanghai” — crewmen needed for the China 
trade, using such cost-effective management techniques as flogging to 
force the involuntary sailors to work.) Gradually it grew more difficult for 
clippers to compete against the "iron ships and wooden men" of the Age 
of Steam. Since the day the first steamship in Asian waters, the 
paddlewheeler, Forbes, arrived on the China coast in the middle of the last 
century, the days of the clippers were numbered. But the doomed clip¬ 
pers continued to ply the seas, and new clippers were being built as late 
as the first decades of this century. 

Now the clippers are gone, the lorchas are scuttled, and the pirates 
were few and far between. But the junks of the China Coast endure. They 
were there first. Somehow, it would not be surprising if the junks out¬ 
lasted the supertankers and containerships of the present day. 





Waiting for the ship to come in 





T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple ® Compare' 


Current Events 

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


Here are the first lines of the Events subroutine: 

765 REM EVENTS SUBROUTINE (7H0-6S1) 

7 e 10 IF K = 1 THEN RETURN 
7H1 K = l: 

X = 50 + INT ( RND (1) * 100) + 1: 

GN = INT ( RND (1) * 3) +1: 

XP = (X + (GN * 50)) * 100: 

IF C < XP OR RND (1) < -75 THEN fl05 

712 GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB 12: 

PRINT " A BROKER OFFERS TO TAKE YOUR": 
PRINT "VESSEL IN TRADE FOR ONE WITH": 

PRINT GN + Gi" GUNS & "iX + NliH" CAPACITY" 


187 



188 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


PRINT "FOR "iXPi" IN CASH. WILL YOU": 

PRINT " ACCEPT (<Y> OR <N>)f"M 

GOSUB bO: 

VTAB IS: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN C = C - XP: 

SH = SH + X: 

MU = MU + X: 

G = G + GN: 

GOSUB 130: 

This routine will allow the player to trade in one ship for a slightly 
larger one with more guns. These lines operate only one time out of 
four, if we just arrived in port, and if we have more than enough cash. 

A "1" for the value of the flag K indicates that we've already gone 
through the Events subroutine this time in port, and line 790 then 
RETURNS us to the beginning of the Market Price routine at line 220. But 
if we haven't gone through Events, line 791 sets K to 1. 

Line 791 next sets both how much extra capacity (X) is in the new ship, 
and how many more guns (GN) it has. Then the expense of the transac¬ 
tion (XP) is calculated. This is done by multiplying the number of addi¬ 
tional guns by 50, adding the result to the extra hold capacity, then 
multiplying that sum by 100. If we then are rich enough and lucky 
enough, we're offered the deal. 

Line 800 continues the offer display, and (if we choose to trade in our 
ship) the line subtracts the cost of the deal (XP) from our cash (C). It then 
adds the amount of the extra capacity (X) to both our available hold space 
(SH) and to our ship's total capacity (MW). The new guns (GN) are 
added to our old (G), and we GOSUB 130 to update the screen in light of 
the transaction. 

Whether or not we're offered a larger ship, we'll continue the Events 
subroutine: 


60S GOSUB 1340 



Current Events: CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 189 


flio IF C > D AND D > EOOO AND RND (1) > -7 
THEN GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT "YOU'VE BEEN ATTACKED AND ROBBED 
BY IRON LOTUS RUFFIANS-, TAIPAN!"'-,: 

C = INT (C /3) : 

GOSUB 7L>0: 

GOSUB 130 


Here we see a very good argument in favor of paying off our debts! 
There's a chance that Elder Brother Wu's braves may rob us of one third 
of our cash. This can happen if: 1) our cash is greater than what we owe 
Wu, 2) we owe Wu more than 2000 in cash, and 3) we're unlucky. Wu's 
Iron Lotus society has members in all of our ports o'call. We don't have to 
be in Hongkong to be robbed. (Notice that our debt is not reduced if 
we're mugged!) 

The Events subroutine now continues to line 820: 

fiEO GOSUB IflO: 

GOSUB fiUD: 

GOSUB no: 

GOSUB 1340: 

DN = INT ((C / E) * RND (1)) : 

IF RND (1) > -fl AND TR = 0 
AND L <> 0 THEN VTAB IE: 

PRINT "A MESSENGER FROM " i L Y $ =>" ASKS": 

PRINT "THAT YOU RETURN TO HONGKONG" 

BE1 IF RND (0) > -a AND TR = 0 AND L <> 0 THEN 
PRINT "WITHOUT DELAY-, TAIPAN-": 

GOSUB ?ao 



190 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


First off, line 820 has us GOSUB 180. That routine, the Price Variation 
subroutine, was explained in detail in Chapter 5. It operates once upon 
entering each port in order to randomly set the actual prices for each item 
of trade — GP(I) — within a range determined by the base prices for the 
items in that port — AP(L,I). This must be done simply because there is 
always some fluctuation in markets. It's also more interesting to provide 
some uncertainty to the player. Yet the variations in prices provided for in 
this subroutine are fairly minor compared to the variations from one port 
to the next. This fact makes it generally possible to plan a port-to-port 
strategy for trading. 

But when line 820 next GOSUBs 860, a wider fluctuation of market 
prices is brought into play: 

fiSS REM BEARS ’N' BULLS SUBROUTINE (Bb0-110) 

BUD I = INT ( RND (1) * b) 

fl?0 IF RND (1) < .85 THEN RETURN 

aao CP(I) = INT (GP(*) 

* ( RND (1) * M) + .5) 

BID VTAB IE: 

PRINT L$(L)i" MARKET FORCES HAVE": 

PRINT "DRIVEN "iG$(I)i" PRICES TO 
PRINT GP(I) i : 

PRINT "!"i 

100 GOSUB ?ao 


110 RETURN 



Current Events: CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 191 


Out of every hundred port visits we make, about fifteen times we'll 
encounter larger than normal price variations in one item. That item is 
selected randomly in line 860. 

Line 870 has us RETURN without unusual fluctuations in about 85% of 
our visits. 

The new price of the item involved is set to anywhere from one half its 
"normal" price to three times normal, in line 880. (It's always possible 
that the price set will still not be very unusual.) 

An announcement of the fluctuation is given by line 890. Line 900 
gives a Delay subroutine call, and 910 RETURNS program flow to the 
Events subroutine at line 820. 

There is yet a third subroutine which line 820 now calls, the Hi/Lo sub¬ 
routine: 

IAS RE(1 HI-L0 SUBROUTINE (150-B10) 

150 FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

IF GP(I) > H (L11) THEN H(L-,I) = GP(I) 

BOO IF G P (I ) < L ( L 11) OR L ( L I) = 0 THEN L ( L -> I) = 
GP (I) 

B10 NEXT I: 

RETURN 


The Hi/Lo subroutine keeps information up to date for the Records 
subroutine. The subroutine goes through a loop, comparing the current 
local market prices for each item — GP(I) — to the previous high and low 
prices for the same items. If a new record high or low price for an item in 
the port we're visiting is encountered, that value is placed into two- 



192 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


dimensional array H(L,I) or L(L,I). After these checks are made, the pro¬ 
gram RETURNS. 

Meanwhile, back at line 820, variable DN is set to a value equal to up to 
half the player's cash. (This variable may be used soon to determine how 
much Li Yuen wants for a "donation".) Next, a warning message may be 
given to the player, if the player's tribute to piratical Li Yuen is not "paid 
up". The flag TR can either equal zero, in which case we're in arrears 
with our "insurance policy", or TR can equal one, to indicate we're "in 
good hands" with Li Yuen. If Li has either never been paid tribute, or has 
decided that our last payment has "expired", a "please visit" message 
may be delivered to us upon arriving in any port except Hongkong. In 
these circumstances, we'll encounter one of Li's messengers about one 
time out of five. (Generally speaking, this is a message which should be 
heeded!) 

Every time we arrive in Hongkong without Li Yuen's protection, we're 
given (assuming we have at least one hundred in cash) an opportunity to 
make a "contribution" to Li: 

630 IF C > 1DD AND TR = □ 

AND L = D THEN GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT YS$ i"i LIEUTENANTS": 

PRINT "OF THE MARINER-, " i LY$ASK IF": 

PRINT "YOU WILL DONATE ";: 

<2 = DN: 

GOSUB 1330: 

PRINT "TO THE TEMPLE OF TIN HAU-, THE" 

A31 IF C > 100 AND TR = 0 AND L = 0 

THEN PRINT "SEA GODDESS- (Y) OR (N)" 


Using the value we set in line 820 for DN, the above lines give us a very 
pleasantly worded shake-down for money. (We can pay and feel warm 
inside — after all, we're just making a church contribution!) 

The next two lines handle our input, adjustments to our cash and 
tribute-status, and the reaction of Mr. Yamato and Mr. Smythe: 



Current Events: CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 193 


640 IF C > 0 AND TR = 0 AND L = 0 THEN GOSUB bO: 
IF X$ = "Y" THEN C = C - DN: 

TR = l: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT " ": 

PRINT " "iYSSi" THANK": 

PRINT " YOUn AND DEPART.": 

PRINT: 

PRINT A$i 

641 IF C > 0 AND TR = 0 AND L = 0 
THEN IF X$ <> "Y" THEN GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT " ": 

PRINT " "iYS$i" DEPART": 

PRINT "ABRUPTLY IN A CHILLY SILENCE.": 

PRINT A*:, 


Now we only need to do a little screen-cleaning, run a Delay subrou¬ 
tine call, and update the screen (in case we just parted with some 
money). We also need to RETURN, so the game can continue at line 220. 
Lines 850 and 851 do this: 

6S0 IF (TR = 0 AND L = 0) 

OR X$ = "Y" AND L = 0 THEN PRINT: 

PRINT A$i: 

GOSUB 760: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT: 

PRINT 



194 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


651 RETURN 


Give yourself a hearty pat on your back. You've now finished entering 
the main portion of Taipan! Only the Sea Action subroutines in the next 
chapter remain. 

Here are this chapter's lines of BASIC code once again: 

165 REN HI-LO SUBROUTINE (ITO-EIO) 

nO FOR I = 0 TO 5: 

IF GP(I) > H(Lnl) THEN H(L-iI) = GP(I) 

EDO IF GP(I) < L ( L-> I) OR L ( L •. I) = 0 THEN L ( LI) = 
GP (I) 

E10 NEXT I: 

RETURN 

765 REN EVENTS SUBROUTINE (7*10-651) 

7*10 IF K = 1 THEN RETURN 

7T1 K = is 

X = 50 + INT ( RND (1) * 100) + 1= 

GN = INT ( RND (1) * 3) +1: 

XP = (X + (GN * 50)) * 100: 

IF C < XP OR RND (1) < -75 THEN 605 

T'lE GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT " A BROKER OFFERS TO TAKE YOUR": 

PRINT "VESSEL IN TRADE FOR ONE WITH": 

PRINT GN + Gi" GUNS & "iX + Nidi" CAPACITY" 



Current Events: CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 195 


ADO PRINT "FOR "^XPn" IN CASH- WILL YOU": 
PRINT " ACCEPT (<Y> OR <N>)?":,: 

GOSUB bO: 

VTAB IE: 

IF X$ = "Y" THEN C = C - XP: 

SH = SH + X: 

Hill = Mil + X: 

G = G + GN: 

GOSUB 130 

A05 GOSUB 1340 

810 IF C > D AND D > EOOO AND RND (1) > •? 
THEN GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT "YOU'VE BEEN ATTACKED AND ROBBED 
BY IRON LOTUS RUFFIANS-. TAIPAN !" i : 

C = INT (C / 3) : 

GOSUB 7b0: 

GOSUB 130 

8E0 GOSUB 180: 

GOSUB 8b0: 

GOSUB nO: 

GOSUB 1340: 

DN = INT ((C / E) * RND (1)): 

IF RND (1) > -8 AND TR = 0 
AND L <> 0 THEN VTAB IE: 

PRINT " A MESSENGER FROM "nLY$i" ASKS" 
PRINT "THAT YOU RETURN TO HONGKONG" 

8E1 IF RND (0) > -8 AND TR = 0 AND L <> 0 
PRINT "WITHOUT DELAY-. TAIPAN ■ " : 

GOSUB 780 


r 


THEN 



196 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


A30 IF C > 100 AND TR = 0 

AND L = □ THEN GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT YS$i"i LIEUTENANTS": 

PRINT "OF THE MARINER-. "iLY^i"-. ASK IF": 
PRINT "YOU WILL DONATE 
Q = DN: 

GOSUB 1330: 

PRINT "TO THE TEMPLE OF TIN HAU -. THE" 

A31 IF C > IDO AND TR = 0 AND L = 0 

THEN PRINT "SEA GODDESS. (Y) OR (N)" 

AMD IF C > D AND TR = D AND L = 0 THEN GOSUB L.0 
IF X$ = "Y" THEN C = C - DN: 

TR = l: 

GOSUB 130: 

GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IE: 

PRINT " ": 

PRINT " " iYS$i" THANK": 

PRINT " YOU-. AND DEPART.": 

PRINT: 

PRINT ASm 

A41 IF C > 0 AND TR = 0 AND L = 0 

THEN IF X$ <> "Y" THEN GOSUB 1340: 

VTAB IS: 

PRINT " ": 

PRINT " "^YS$t" DEPART": 

PRINT "ABRUPTLY IN A CHILLY SILENCE.": 

PRINT A$i 



Current Events: CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


flSD IF (TR = □ AND L = □) 

OR X$ = "Y" AND L = D THEN PRINT: 

PRINT A$i: 

COSUB 7fl0: 

VTAB 13: 

PRINT A$: 

PRINT: 

PRINT 

fiSl RETURN 

flS5 REn BEARS 'N' BULLS SUBROUTINE (flbO-TIO) 

flbO I = INT ( RND (1) * U) 

fl?0 IF RND (1) < •AS THEN RETURN 

flfiO GP(I) = INT (GP(I) 

* ( RND (1) * M) + -S) 

6=50 VTAB IB: 

PRINT L$(L)i" MARKET FORCES HAVE": 

PRINT "DRIVEN "^G$(I)i" PRICES TO "i: 
PRINT GP(I) V : 

PRINT "!"i 

TDD GOSUB 7fl0 

T1D 


RETURN 




Nicholas Iquan 




T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Action at Sea 

CHAPTER NINETEEN 


These subroutines are a simple method of giving some visual excitement 
to our pirate counters. 

Using the Apple II in BASIC, it is very difficult to operate high- 
resolution graphics, especially with any kind of animation speed. So 
what we have here is an example of compromises: we've used your 
Apple's normal characters, like " \ ", and "0", to build and 

move a fair representation of a pirate junk. 

These subroutines, which are called by GOSUBs mainly in the Pirates 
routine, will display the arrival and the attack of a pirate ship. If you're 
lucky, you'll also get to see pirate ships run away from you, or even sink. 
Or you might witness yourself sinking! 

By now, you must be either very anxious to RUN Taipan, or very weary 
of typing this game into your machine. (Maybe both!) The Authors will 
spare you convoluted explanations in this chapter, and will only tell 
briefly what the routines do. 


199 



200 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Here's the first routine, which is called by line 50 in the Initialized rou¬ 
tine when the program first starts. This sets up the shape of the pirate 
ship: 

4555 REH SEA ACTION SUBROUTINES (5000-b3b0) 

4557 REH GRAPHICS INITIALIZATION (5000-5120) 

5000 DIM CH$ (14) -l CN$ (14 ) 

SOUS FOR VI = 0 TO 12 

5010 READ CH$(V1) 

5020 CN$(VI) = CH*(V1) 


5030 NEXT VI 

5040 DATA VI " : 

5050 DATA " - 

50b0 DATA " - \: 

5070 DATA " :/ - \\ 

5075 DATA " // \\\ 

SOflO DATA "/// \\\ 

5055 DATA "/// \\ 

5050 DATA "/// - :\ 

5100 DATA "// - : 











Action at Sea: CHAPTER NINETEEN 201 


5105 

DATA 


• 

5110 

DATA 

n •_ 

: :000: 

5111 

DATA 

\— 

-/ / 

5112 

DATA 

" \ 

/ 

5120 

RETURN 




You can already see, in the DATA lines, what the pirate junk looks like, 
can't you? 

Now, here's the first Sea Action subroutine which the Pirates routine 
calls when the enemy is first sighted: 

52^0 REM PIRATES ARRIVE (5300-5370) 

5300 G0SUB 5=150 

5305 IF ID <> 1 THEN CH$(0) = " ===: 

5310 FOR A = 1 TO 10: 

VTAB l: 

PRINT ASi: 

NEXT A 

5320 FOR A = 1 TO 30 

5340 FOR B = 0 TO 13 

5350 VTAB B + 1: 

HTAB 40 - A: 

PRINT LEFTS (CHS (B) i A) ■> ^" "i 




202 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


53b0 NEXT B: 
NEXT A 

5370 RETURN 


The Pirates Arrive subroutine makes the pirate ship sail into view from 
the right side of the screen. If the ship is one of Li Yuen's, a banner is 
shown atop the highest mast. 

The following subroutine shows the blazing guns of the pirate ship: 


5350 

REN PIRATES FIRE 

(5360-5440) 

53T0 

FOR A = 1 

TO INT ( 

RND (1) 

* b) 

5410 

Al = INT 

( RND (1) 

* 10) + 

1 

5420 

IF Al = 5 

THEN 5410 



5430 

HTAB lb + 

Al: 




VTAB 11: 
PRINT "*" 


5432 PRINT "aG" 

5433 HTAB lb + Al: 
VTAB 11: 

PRINT " " 

5435 NEXT A 

5440 RETURN 



Action at Sea: CHAPTER NINETEEN 203 


Notice the "aG" in line 5432 above. It's there to let us hear the pirates 
firing off each shot. (Remember to type it using the Control and G keys 
simultaneously.) 

The "Cannon Hit" subroutine makes our beeper sound off to show 
either that we've been hit or that the pirates have: 

5540 REM CANNON HIT (5550-551=0) 

5550 PRINT "aG" 

55L0 RETURN 


This subroutine punches holes in the image of the pirate ship, if we've 
hit it: 

5t.fi0 DAMAGE ’EM (5730-57U0) 

5730 I = INT ( RND (1) * 17) + 2= 

II = INT ( RND (1) * 5) + 2 

5740 CHS(ID = LEFTS (CHS(Il)iI - 1) + n " 

+ MIDS (CHS (II) i I + 1 -i LEN (CHS(Il))) 

5750 HTAB 10: 

VTAB II + l: 

PRINT CHS (ID 

5755 G0SUB 7fl0 


57b0 


RETURN 



204 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


There are few greater pleasures than seeing this one work! The pirate 
junk slides down into the ocean: 

SA30 REN PIRATES SINK (5A40-5=140) 

5A40 FOR A = □ TO IE 

SASO VTAB A + l: 

PRINT A*i 

5A70 FOR A1 = □ TO IE - A 

5AA0 VTAB E + A + Al: 

HTAB 10: 

PRINT CH$(Al) 

SATO NEXT Al 

5=110 NEXT A 

5=130 VTAB 14: 

PRINT A$i 

5=130 GOSUB 5=150 

5=140 RETURN 

If we've sunk one pirate junk, this subroutine makes the next junk 
look undamaged: 

5=150 REN REPAIR DANAGE (51^0-5=1=10) j 
5=11=0 FOR A = 0 TO 13 


5=170 CH$(A) 


CN$(A) 



Action at Sea: CHAPTER NINETEEN 205 


STflO NEXT A 
5^0 RETURN 

Next to the "Pirates Sink" subroutine, this one's our favorite. It makes 
the pirates disappear off the left side of the screen: 

blOO REM PIRATES DEPART (fc,110-t>21D) 

bllD FOR A = 1 TO 0 STEP - 1 

b!30 FOR B = 0 TO 13 

bl4D HTAB A+ 1: 

VTAB B + l: 

PRINT CHS (B) : i" " 

blSO NEXT B: 

NEXT A 

blbD FOR A = 32 TO 1 STEP - 1 

blfiO FOR B = 0 TO 13 

bllD HTAB l: 

VTAB B + is 

PRINT RIGHTS (CHS (B) ■> A) i" " 

b200 NEXT B: 

NEXT A 


fc>210 


RETURN 



206 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


If we run from the pirates, we show the pirate junk receding to the 
right side of the screen. (If we don't manage to get away from any or all of 
the attackers, we'll soon see a junk catching up with us.) Here's the sub¬ 
routine: 

LEEO REM WE PULL AWAY (bE30-bEA0) 

LE30 FOR A = 30 TO 1 STEP - 1 

LSSD FOR B = 0 TO 13 

L.EL0 HTAB 40 - A: 

VTAB B + l: 

PRINT " "i LEFTS (CHS (B)-, A) i CHRS (A)i" "i 

LE70 NEXT B: 

NEXT A 

LEAD RETURN 


Ouch! We see bubbles floating up the screen as we head for Davy 
Jones': 

bS'lO REN WE’RE SUNK! (t.300-b3b0) 

1,300 FOR A = 1 TO 17 

U310 FOR B = 1 TO 100: 

NEXT B 

L3E0 VTABE4: 

HTAB INT ( RND (1) * 40) + 1: 

PRINT "0 n 



Action at Sea: CHAPTER NINETEEN 207 


fc.350 NEXT A 

k3b0 RETURN 

There you have it. Congratulations on typing in a Contextual Com¬ 
puter Game! 




T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Bibliography 

APPENDIX A 


The Authors would like to express their appreciation to the Public Library 
system. It is a treasure of our nation. May it remain free. 

Here are some of the books which either inspired us, or otherwise 
aided us in our project: 

Tai-Pan, by James Clavell, Dell 

Dynasty, by Robert S. Elegant, Fawcett 

Sail and Sweep in China, by G.R.G. Worchester, Her Majesty's Station¬ 
ery Office 

Rascals in Paradise, by James Michener and A. Grove Day, Random 
House 

Sailing through China, by Paul Theroux, Houghton Mifflin Company 

Historical and Geographical Dictionary of Japan, by E. Papinot, Charles E. 
Tuttle Company 


209 




210 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


China: Adventures in Eyewitness History, by Rhoda Hoff, Henry Z. 
Walck, Inc. 

The Art of War, by Sun Tzu (edited by James Clavell), Delacorte Press 



T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple® Computer 


Playing Taipan 

APPENDIX B 


Taipan is meant to be a challenging game. A player may sometime find 
that some things which happen in the game are "unfair". Even making 
the right decisions doesn't always work. For instance, paying Li Yuen his 
tribute does not guarantee that he won't attack us without warning. Like¬ 
wise, the cruel sea may cause our ship to founder, ending our budding 
mercantile career early. 

But in the real world, people are sometimes as unpredictable as Li 
Yuen. And the sea has never cared for human concepts of justice. We 
must do the best that we can, within the limits of success which our intel¬ 
ligence allows. If an "unfair" event kills us off in Taipan, remember that it 
is just a game. We pick up the pieces and start over again. 

Taipan needs very little in the way of playing instructions. Everything 
which happens is self-explanatory. The main guides to use when playing 
the game are common sense and the lessons of experience. This is how 
the real taipans operated in a world alien to them. 


211 



212 TAIPAN: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


People are often tempted to "cheat", even in single-player games. It's 
possible, of course, to cheat in Taipan. But the issue of who is cheated is 
important. A player can get twenty-humpzillion guns and three- 
quadshillion in cash, simply by input variable values while in the "com¬ 
mand" mode. But why? What kind of game would we then have? 

Taipan is a game which puts the player in the shoes of a China Trader 
of the 1800's. Those were not clean shoes — they were stained with blood 
and opium. The Authors do not intend that players emulate the old tai- 
pans in real life but rather to obtain some measure of understanding of a 
real historical context through the medium of the microcomputer. This is 
an opportunity to "re-live" the past which was impossible for earlier gen¬ 
erations — and the Contextual Computer Games of the future will doubt¬ 
less make our efforts appear puny. 



Index 


Arrival routine, 131, 171 
Arrow War, 184 
ASCII, 65 

Bears 'n' Bulls subroutine, 190 
Big Number Subroutine, 39 
Bombay, 15 
Boston Tea Party, 13 
British, 15 
Buy/Sell routine, 48 

Calcutta, 15 

Cape of Good Hope, 25 
Captain China, 140 
Captain del Cano, 22 
Capture routine, 165, 170 
Cebu, 22 
Cheating, 47, 64 
China, 1 

China clippers, 185 
China Trade, 1, 2 
Chinese Taels, 29 
Ch'ing Dynasty, 13 
Clean Up subroutine, 78 
Contextual computer game, 5 
Commissioner Lin Tse-hsu, 16 
Crown Colony, 20 
Cursor, 64 

Delay subroutine, 61 
Dollars Mex, 22 
Dragon boats, 184 
Dutch, 23 
posts, 23 

East India Company, 23 

Elder Brother Wu, 11, 29, 41 
Elliot, Captain Charles, 20 
Embark routine, 129 
Events subroutine, 187 


Flag, 47 
Formosa, 140 

Game, 29 
Game time, 29 
Get String, 45 
Godown, 17 
Godown subroutine, 85 
Item choice, 86 
Grand Canal, 21 

Han Empire 13 
Harris, Townsend, 21 
Hi/Lo subroutine, 191 
Hongkong, 20 
Victoria, 20 
Hsu, Paul, 13 
Huai, 21 

Initialization, 9 

Input Error, 80 

Input Error subroutine, 46 

Intramuros, 22 

Iron Lotus Triad, 111 

Item Choice subroutine, 49 

Iquan, Nicholas, 140, 141 

Japan, 1, 14 
Jingals, 144 
Junks, 183 

Kamikaze, 183 
Koxinga, 140 

Lapu-Lapu, 22 
Lender menu, 113 
Lender subroutine, 112 
Liverpool, 25 
Li Yuen, 11 


213 



214 TAIPA N: A Historical Adventure for the Apple Computer 


Loops, 28 
nested, 27 
Lorcha, 183 

Macau, 20, 140, 183 
Magellan, Ferdinand, 22 
Main Display subroutine, 37 
Malay, 17 

Manchu Empire, 141 
Manila, 22 

Market Menu Input routine, 44 
Ming Dynasty, 13, 141 
Min Kingdom, 21 
Muslim, 22 

Nicholas Iquan, 140, 141 
No-Can-Do subroutine, 61 

Opium War, 16 

Other Options routine, 60, 87 

Pearl River, 20 
Pepper, 14 

Perry, Commodore, 1, 21 

Philippines, 21 

Pirates, 147 

Pirates routine, 147 

Polo, Marco, 14 

Port Choice subroutine, 97 

Portuguese, 21 

Price Variation subroutine, 28 
Queen Victoria, 16 
Raffles Hotel, 23 

Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford, 23 
Random number generator, 30 
Randomizer subroutine, 30, 34 


Records subroutine, 96 
menu, 97 

Restaurant French, 19 
Roaring Forties, 25 

Saigon, 24 
Sampans, 182 
Schall, Father Adam, 13 
Scientific notation, 39 
Ship Status subroutine, 148 
Silk, 15 
Singapore, 19 
Smythe, 151 

Sooper Dooper Number Scooper 
subroutine, 62 
Spain, 21 
Spices, 1 

Taipan, 1 

Taipan geography, 19 
Tea, 13 

That's All Folks routine, 123 
Transaction Quantity routine, 67 
Treaty of Kanagawa, 21 
Treaty ports, 20 
Triads, 2 

Update subroutine, 172 

Victoria, 20 
Voyage routine, 131 
storm, 133 

Walla-walla boat, 183 
Whole numbers, 67 

Yamato, 151 
Yangstse river, 21 
Yellow river, 21 




T A I P A N 

A Historical Adventure for the Apple ® Computer 
is available on disk! 

For just $4.95 plus shipping and handling, we'll send you a disk that 
contains the Taipan program. The disk runs on the Apple II Plus, lie, 

or lie. 

Use the handy order form below to order your Taipan adventure. 


Please send me the disk containing the Taipan adventure (#7764-5). I 
am enclosing a check or money order for $4.95 per disk plus $2.50 for 
shipping and handling for each order. 

Quantity Price 

_ $4.95 

NJ and CA residents add tax 
shipping and handling 
total amount 


Total 


$2.50 


Name (print)--— --- 

Address----- 

City____State-Zip- 

Prices subject to change. Offer good in USA only. Allow 4-6 
weeks for delivery. 

Send your check or money order to: 

Hayden Book Company 
Department TP 
10 Mulholland Drive 
Hasbrouck Heights, NJ 07604 





